chapter one
an invisible world figure one  .  one
a veterinarian get ready to clean a sea turtle cover in oil follow the deepwater horizon oil spill in the gulf of mexico in two  zero  one  zero .
after the spill , the population of a naturally occur oil - eat marine bacterium call alcanivorax borkumensis skyrocket , help to get rid of the oil .
scientist be work on way to genetically engineer this bacterium to be more efficient in clean up future spill .
( credit  modification of work by noaa 's national ocean service )
chapter outline one  .  one
what - pron - ancestor knew one  .  two
a systematic approach one  .  three types of microorganisms introduction from boil thermal hot spring to deep beneath the antarctic ice , microorganism can be find almost everywhere on earth in great quantity .
microorganism ( or microbe , as - pron - be also call ) be small organism .
most be so small that - pron - can not be see without a microscope .
most microorganism be harmless to human and , in fact , many be helpful .
- pron - play fundamental role in ecosystem everywhere on earth , form the backbone of many food webs .
people use - pron - to make biofuel , medicine , and even food .
without microbe , there would be no bread , cheese , or beer .
- pron - body be fill with microbe , and - pron - skin alone be home to trillion of them . [ one ]
some of - pron - - pron - can not live without  other cause disease that can make - pron - sick or even kill - pron - .
although much more be know today about microbial life than ever before , the vast majority of this invisible world remain unexplored .
microbiologist continue to identify new way that microbe benefit and threaten human .
one .
j . hulcr et al .
“
a jungle in there  bacteria in belly buttons be highly diverse , but predictable .
"
plos one seven no . one  one ( two  zero  one  two ) 
e four  seven  seven  one  two .
doi  one  zero  .  one  three  seven  one  / journal . pone .  zero  zero  four  seven  seven  one  two .
chapter one  an invisible world one  five one  .  one
what - pron - ancestor knew learning objectives  describe how - pron - ancestor improve food with the use of invisible microbe  describe how the cause of sickness and disease be explain in ancient time , prior to the invention of the microscope 
describe key historical event associate with the birth of microbiology
most people today , even those who know very little about microbiology , be familiar with the concept of microbe , or “ germ , " and - pron - role in human health .
schoolchildren learn about bacteria , virus , and other microorganism , and many even view specimen under a microscope .
but a few hundred year ago , before the invention of the microscope , the existence of many type of microbe be impossible to prove .
by definition , microorganism , or microbe , be very small organism  many type of microbe be too small to see without a microscope , although some parasite and fungi be visible to the naked eye .
human have be live with - and use - microorganism for much long than - pron - have be able to see - pron - .
historical evidence suggest that human have have some notion of microbial life since prehistoric time and have use that knowledge to develop food as well as prevent and treat disease .
in this section , - pron - will explore some of the historical application of microbiology as well as the early beginning of microbiology as a science .
fermented foods and beverage people across the world have enjoy ferment food and beverage like beer , wine , bread , yogurt , cheese , and pickle vegetable for all of record history .
discovery from several archeological site suggest that even prehistoric people take advantage of fermentation to preserve and enhance the taste of food .
archaeologist study pottery jar from a neolithic village in china find that people be make a ferment beverage from rice , honey , and fruit as early as seven  zero  zero  zero bc . [ two ] production of these food and beverage require microbial fermentation , a process that use bacteria , mold , or yeast to convert sugar ( carbohydrate ) to alcohol , gas , and organic acid
( figure one  .  three ) .
while - pron - be likely that people first learn about fermentation by accident - perhaps by drink old milk that have curdle or old grape juice that have ferment - - pron - later learn to harness the power of fermentation to make product like bread , cheese , and wine .
figure one  .  three
a microscopic view of saccharomyces cerevisiae , the yeast responsible for make bread rise ( left ) .
yeast be a microorganism .
- pron - cell metabolize the carbohydrate in flour ( middle ) and produce carbon dioxide , which cause the bread to rise ( right ) .
( credit middle 
modification of work by janus sandsgaard  credit right  modification of work by “ mdreibelbis” / flickr )
two .
p . e . mcgovern et al .
“
ferment beverages of pre - and proto - historic china .
”
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america one no . five  one
( two  zero  zero  four  )  one  seven  five  nine  three – one  seven  five  nine  eight .
doi  one  zero  .  one  zero  seven  three  / pnas .  zero  four  zero  seven  nine  two  one  one  zero  two .
one  six chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five part one cora , a four  one  - year - old lawyer and mother of two , have recently be experience severe headache , a high fever , and a stiff neck .
- pron - husband , who have accompany cora to see a doctor , report that cora also seem confused at time and unusually drowsy .
base on these symptom , the doctor suspect that cora may have meningitis , a potentially life - threaten infection of the tissue that surround the brain and spinal cord .
meningitis have several potential cause .
- pron - can be bring on by bacteria , fungus , virus , or even a reaction to medication or exposure to heavy metal .
although people with viral meningitis usually heal on - pron - own , bacterial and fungal meningitis be quite serious and require treatment .
cora 's doctor order a lumbar puncture ( spinal tap ) to take three sample of cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) from around the spinal cord ( figure one  .  two ) .
the sample will be send to laboratory in three different department for testing  clinical chemistry , microbiology , and hematology .
the sample will first be visually examine to determine whether the csf be abnormally colored or cloudy  then the csf will be examine under a microscope to see if - pron - contain a normal number of red and white blood cell and to check for any abnormal cell type .
in the microbiology lab , the speciman will be centrifuge to concentrate any cell in a sediment  this sediment will be smear on a slide and stain with a gram stain .
gram staining be a procedure use to differentiate between two different type of bacteria ( gram - positive and gram - negative ) .
about eight  zero % of patient with bacterial meningitis will show bacteria in - pron - csf with a gram stain . [ three ] cora 's gram stain do not show any bacteria , but - pron - doctor decide to prescribe - pron - antibiotic just in case .
part of the csf sample will be culture - put in special dish to see if bacteria or fungi will grow .
- pron - take some time for most microorganism to reproduce in sufficient quantity to be detect and analyze .

what type of microorganism would be kill by antibiotic treatment ?
figure one  .  two ( a )
a lumbar puncture be use to take a sample of a patient 's cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) for testing .
a needle be insert between two vertebrae of the low back , call the lumbar region .
( b
) csf should be clear , as in this sample .
abnormally cloudy csf may indicate an infection but must be test further to confirm the presence of microorganism .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by james heilman )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus chapter one  an invisible world one  seven
the iceman treateth prehistoric human have a very limited understanding of the cause of disease , and various culture develop different belief and explanation .
while many believe that illness be punishment for anger the god or be simply the result of fate , archaeological evidence suggest that prehistoric people attempt to treat illness and infection .
one example of this be ötzi the iceman , a five  three  zero  zero  - year - old mummy find freeze in the ice of the ötzal alps on the austrian - italian border in one  nine  nine  one .
because ötzi be so well preserve by the ice , researcher discover that - pron - be infect with the egg of the parasite trichuris trichiura , which may have cause - pron - to have abdominal pain and anemia .
researcher also find evidence of borrelia burgdorferi , a bacterium that cause lyme disease .
some researcher think ötzi may have be try to treat - pron - infection with the woody fruit of the piptoporus betulinus fungus , which be discover tie to - pron - belongings . [ five ]
this fungus have both laxative and antibiotic property .
ötzi be also cover in tattoo that be make by cut incision into - pron - skin , fill - pron - with herb , and then burn the herbs . [ six ]
there be speculation that this may have be another attempt to treat - pron - health ailment .
early notions of disease , contagion , and containment several ancient civilization appear to have have some understanding that disease could be transmit by thing - pron - could not see .
this be especially evident in historical attempt to contain the spread of disease .
for example , the bible refer to the practice of quarantine people with leprosy and other disease , suggest that people understand that disease could be communicable .
ironically , while leprosy be communicable , - pron - be also a disease that progress slowly .
this mean that people be likely quarantine after - pron - have already spread the disease to other .
the ancient greeks attribute disease to bad air , mal'aria , which - pron - call " miasmatic odor .
”
- pron - develop hygiene practice that build on this idea .
the romans also believe in the miasma hypothesis and create a complex sanitation infrastructure to deal with sewage .
in rome , - pron - build aqueduct , which bring fresh water into the city , and a giant sewer , the cloaca maxima , which carry waste away and into the river tiber ( figure one  .  four ) .
some researcher believe that this infrastructure help protect the romans from epidemic of waterborne illness .
three .
rebecca buxton .
“
examination of gram stains of spinal fluid - bacterial meningitis .
" american society for microbiology .
two  zero  zero  seven .
http / / www . microbelibrary . org / library / gram - stain /  three  zero  six  five  - examination - of - gram - stains - of - spinal - fluid - bacterial - meningitis four .
a . keller et al .
“
new insights into the tyrolean iceman ' s origin and phenotype as infer by whole - genome sequencing .
"
nature communications , three ( two  zero  one  two )  six  nine  eight .
doi  one  zero  .  one  zero  three  eight  / ncomms one  seven  zero  one .
five .
l . capasso .
“ five  three  zero  zero
year ago , the ice man use natural laxatives and antibiotics .
"
the lancet , three  five  two ( one  nine  nine  eight ) nine  one  four  three  one  eight  six  four .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  /
s zero  one  four  zero - six  seven  three  six  (  zero  five  )  seven  nine  nine  three  nine - six . six .
l . capasso , l . “
five  three  zero  zero year ago , the ice man use natural laxatives and antibiotics .
"
the lancet , three  five  two no .
nine  one  four  three ( one  nine  nine  eight )
 one  eight  six  four .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  / s zero  one  four  zero
- six  seven  three  six  (  zero  five  )  seven  nine  nine  three  nine - six . one  eight chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  .  four ( a )
the cloaca maxima , or “
greatest sewer " ( show in red ) , run through ancient rome .
- pron - be an engineering marvel that carry waste away from the city and into the river tiber .
( b )
these ancient latrine empty into the cloaca maxima .
even before the invention of the microscope , some doctor , philosopher , and scientist make great stride in understand the invisible force - what - pron - now know as microbe - that can cause infection , disease , and death .
the greek physician hippocrates ( four  six  zero – three  seven  zero bc ) be consider the “ father ofwestern medicine
" ( figure one  .  five ) .
unlike many of - pron - ancestor and contemporary , - pron - dismiss the idea that disease be cause by supernatural force .
instead , - pron - posit that disease have natural cause from within patient or - pron - environment .
hippocrate and - pron - heir be believe to have write the hippocratic corpus , a collection of text that make up some of the old survive medical books . [ seven ]
hippocrates be also often credit as the author of the hippocratic oath , take by new physician to pledge - pron - dedication to diagnose and treat patient without cause harm .
seven .
g . pappas et al .
“
insight into infectious disease in the era of hippocrates .
”
international journal of infectious diseases one  two ( two  zero  zero  eight ) four   three  four  seven – three  five  zero .
doi 
http / / dx . doi . org /  one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  / j . ijid .  two  zero  zero  seven  .  one  one  .  zero  zero  three .
chapter one  an invisible world one  nine
while hippocrates be consider the father of western medicine , the greek philosopher and historian thucydide ( four  six  zero – three  nine  five bc ) be consider the father of scientific history because - pron - advocate for evidence - base analysis of cause - and - effect reasoning ( figure one  .  five ) .
among - pron - most important contribution be - pron - observation regard the athenian plague that kill one - third of the population of athens between four  three  zero and four  one  zero bc .
have survive the epidemic - pron - , thucydides make the important observation that survivor do not get re - infected with the disease , even when take care of actively sick people . [ eight ]
this observation show an early understanding of the concept of immunity .
marcus terentius varro ( one  one  six – two  seven bc ) be a prolific roman writer who be one of the first people to propose the concept that thing - pron - can not see ( what - pron - now call microorganism ) can cause disease ( figure one  .  five ) .
in res rusticae ( on farming ) , publish in three  six bc , - pron - say that “ precaution must also be take in neighborhood swamp . . .
because certain minute creature [ animalia minuta ] grow there which can not be see by the eye , which float in the air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and there cause serious diseases . ”[ nine ] figure one  .  five ( a )
hippocrates , the “ father of western medicine , " believe that disease have natural , not supernatural , cause .
( b )
the historian thucydides observe that survivor of the athenian plague be subsequently immune to the infection .
( c ) marcus terentius varro propose that disease could be cause by " certain minute creature . . .
which can not be see by the eye .
"
( credit c  modification of work by alessandro antonelli )
 give two example of food that have historically be produce by human with the aid of microbe .

explain how historical understanding of disease contribute to attempt to treat and contain disease .
the birth of microbiology
while the ancient may have suspect the existence of invisible " minute creature , " - pron - be not until the invention of the microscope that - pron - existence be definitively confirm .
while - pron - be unclear who exactly invent the microscope , a dutch cloth merchant name antonie van leeuwenhoek ( one  six  three  two – one  seven  two  three ) be the first to develop a lens powerful enough to view microbe .
in one  six  seven  five , use a simple but powerful microscope , leeuwenhoek be able to observe single - celle organism , which - pron - describe as " animalcule " or " wee little beastie , " swim in a drop eight .
thucydide .
the history of the peloponnesian war .
the second book .
four  three  one bc .
translate by richard crawley .
http / / classics . mit . edu / thucydides / pelopwar .  two  . second . html .
nine .
plinio prioreschi .
a history of medicine  roman medicine .
lewiston , ny  edwin mellen press , one  nine  nine  eight 
p . two  one  five .
two  zero chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five of rain water .
from - pron - drawing of these little organism , - pron - now know - pron - be look at bacteria and protist .
( - pron - will explore leeuwenhoek 's contribution to microscopy further in how - pron - see the invisible world . )
nearly two  zero  zero year after van leeuwenhoek get - pron - first glimpse of microbe , the “ golden age of microbiology " spawn a host of new discovery between one  eight  five  seven and one  nine  one  four .
two famous microbiologist , louis pasteur and robert koch , be especially active in advance - pron - understanding of the unseen world of microbe ( figure one  .  six ) .
pasteur , a french chemist , show that individual microbial strain have unique property and demonstrate that fermentation be cause by microorganism .
- pron - also invent pasteurization , a process use to kill microorganism responsible for spoilage , and develop vaccine for the treatment of disease , include rabie , in animal and human .
koch , a german physician , be the first to demonstrate the connection between a single , isolate microbe and a know human disease .
for example , - pron - discover the bacteria that cause anthrax ( bacillus anthracis ) , cholera ( vibrio cholera ) , and tuberculosis ( mycobacterium tuberculosis ) . [ one  zero ]
- pron - will discuss these famous microbiologist , and other , in later chapter .
figure one  .  six ( a ) louis pasteur
( one  eight  two  two – one  eight  nine  five ) be credit with numerous innovation that advance the field of microbiology and immunology .
( b ) robert koch ( one  eight  four  three – one  nine  one  zero ) identify the specific microbe that cause anthrax , cholera , and tuberculosis .
as microbiology have develop , - pron - have allow the broad discipline of biology to grow and flourish in previously unimagine way .
much of what - pron - know about human cell come from - pron - understanding of microbe , and many of the tool - pron - use today to study cell and - pron - genetic derive from work with microbe .

how do the discovery of microbe change human understanding of disease ?
one  zero .
s . m . blevins and m . s . bronze .
“ robert koch and the ‘ golden age ' of bacteriology .
”
international journal of infectious diseases .
one  four
no . nine ( two  zero  one  zero )
 e seven  four  four  - e seven  five  one .
doi  one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  / j . ijid .  two  zero  zero  nine  .  one  two  .  zero  zero  three .
chapter one  an invisible world two  one microbiology toolbox because individual microbe be generally too small to be see with the naked eye , the science of microbiology be dependent on technology that can artificially enhance the capacity of - pron - natural sens of perception .
early microbiologist like pasteur and koch have few tool at - pron - disposal than be find in modern laboratory , make - pron - discovery and innovation that much more impressive .
later chapter of this text will explore many application of technology in depth , but for now , here be a brief overview of some of the fundamental tool of the microbiology lab .

microscope produce magnify image of microorganism , human cell and tissue , and many other type of specimen too small to be observe with the naked eye .

stain and dye be use to add color to microbe so - pron - can be better observe under a microscope .
some dye can be use on live microbe , whereas other require that the specimen be fix with chemical or heat before staining .
some stain only work on certain type of microbe because of difference in - pron - cellular chemical composition .
 growth medium be use to grow microorganism in a lab setting .
some medium be liquid  other be more solid or gel - like .
a growth medium provide nutrient , include water , various salt , a source of carbon ( like glucose ) , and a source of nitrogen and amino acid ( like yeast extract ) so microorganism can grow and reproduce .
ingredient in a growth medium can be modify to grow unique type of microorganism .

a petri dish be a flat - lidded dish that be typically one  zero – one  one centimeter ( cm ) in diameter and one – one  .  five cm high .
petri dish make out of either plastic or glass be use to hold growth medium ( figure one  .  seven ) .

test tube be cylindrical plastic or glass tube with round bottom and open top .
- pron - can be use to grow microbe in broth , or semisolid or solid growth medium .

a bunsen burner be a metal apparatus that create a flame that can be use to sterilize piece of equipment .
a rubber tube carry gas ( fuel ) to the burner .
in many lab , bunsen burner be be phase out in favor of infrared microincinerator , which serve a similar purpose without the safety risk of an open flame .

an inoculation loop be a handheld tool that end in a small wire loop ( figure one  .  seven ) .
the loop can be use to streak microorganism on agar in a petri dish or to transfer - pron - from one test tube to another .
before each use , the inoculation loop must be sterilize so culture do not become contaminate .
micro connections two  two chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  .  seven ( a )
this petri dish fill with agar have be streak with legionella , the bacterium responsible for cause legionnaire 's disease .
( b )
an inoculation loop like this one can be use to streak bacteria on agar in a petri dish .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by jeffrey m . vinocur ) one  .  two
a systematic approach learning objectives
 describe how microorganism be classify and distinguished as unique specie  compare historical and current system of taxonomy use to classify microorganism
once microbe become visible to human with the help of microscope , scientist begin to realize - pron - enormous diversity .
microorganism vary in all sort of way , include - pron - size , - pron - appearance , and - pron - rate of reproduction .
to study this incredibly diverse new array of organism , researcher need a way to systematically organize - pron - .
the science of taxonomy taxonomy be the classification , description , identification , and naming of live organism .
classification be the practice of organize organism into different group base on - pron - share characteristic .
the most famous early taxonomist be a swedish botanist , zoologist , and physician name carolus linnaeus ( one  seven  zero  one – one  seven  seven  eight ) .
in one  seven  three  five , linnaeus publish systema naturae , an one  one  - page booklet in which - pron - propose the linnaean taxonomy , a system of categorize and name organism use a standard format so scientist could discuss organism use consistent terminology .
- pron - continue to revise and add to the book , which grow into multiple volume
( figure one  .  eight ) .
chapter one  an invisible world two  three figure one  .  eight swedish botanist , zoologist , and physician carolus linnaeus develop a new system for categorize plant and animal .
in this one  eight  five  three portrait by hendrik hollander , linnaeus be hold a twinflower , name linnaea borealis in - pron - honor .
in - pron - taxonomy , linnaeus divide the natural world into three kingdom  animal , plant , and mineral ( the mineral kingdom be later abandon ) .
within the animal and plant kingdom , - pron - group organism use a hierarchy of increasingly specific level and sublevel base on - pron - similarity .
the name of the level in linnaeus 's original taxonomy be kingdom , class , order , family , genus ( plural  genera ) , and specie .
specie be , and continue to be , the most specific and basic taxonomic unit .
evolve trees of life ( phylogeny )
with advance in technology , other scientist gradually make refinement to the linnaean system and eventually create new system for classify organism .
in the one  eight  zero  zero , there be a grow interest in develop taxonomy that take into account the evolutionary relationship , or phylogeny , of all different specie of organism on earth .
one way to depict these relationship be via a diagram call a phylogenetic tree ( or tree of life ) .
in these diagram , group of organism be arrange by how closely related - pron - be think to be .
in early phylogenetic tree , the relatedness of organism be infer by - pron - visible similarity , such as the presence or absence of hair or the number of limb .
now , the analysis be more complicated .
today , phylogenic analysis include genetic , biochemical , and embryological comparison , as will be discuss later in this chapter .
linnaeus 's tree of life contain just two main branch for all live thing  the animal and plant kingdom .
in one  eight  six  six , ernst haeckel , a german biologist , philosopher , and physician , propose another kingdom , protista , for unicellular organism ( figure one  .  nine ) .
- pron - later propose a fourth kingdom , monera , for unicellular organism whose cell lack nucleus , like bacteria .
two  four chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  .  nine
ernst haeckel 's rendering of the tree of life , from - pron - one  eight  six  six book general morphology of organisms , contain three kingdom  plantae , protista , and animalia .
- pron - later add a fourth kingdom , monera , for unicellular organism lack a nucleus .
nearly one  zero  zero year later , in one  nine  six  nine , american ecologist robert whittaker ( one  nine  two  zero – one  nine  eight  zero ) propose add another kingdom - fungi - in - pron - tree of life .
whittaker 's tree also contain a level of categorization above the kingdom level
- the empire or superkingdom level - to distinguish between organism that have membrane - bind nucleus in - pron - cell ( eukaryote ) and those that do not ( prokaryote ) .
empire prokaryota contain just the kingdom monera .
the empire eukaryota contain the other four kingdom  fungi , protista , plantae , and animalia .
whittaker 's fivekingdom tree be consider the standard phylogeny for many year .
figure one  .  one  zero show how the tree of life have change over time .
note that virus be not find in any of these tree .
that be because - pron - be not make up of cell and thus - pron - be difficult to determine where - pron - would fit into a tree of life .
chapter one  an invisible world two  five figure one  .  one  zero
this timeline show how the shape of the tree of life have change over the century .
even today , the taxonomy of live organism be continually be reevaluate and refine with advance in technology .

briefly summarize how - pron - evolve understanding of microorganism have contribute to change in the way that organism be classify .
part two antibiotic drug be specifically design to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria .
but after a couple of day on antibiotic , cora show no sign of improvement .
also , - pron - csf culture come back from the lab negative .
since bacteria or fungi be not isolate from cora 's csf sample , - pron - doctor rule out bacterial and fungal meningitis .
viral meningitis be still a possibility .
however , cora now report some troubling new symptom .
- pron - be start to have difficulty walk .
- pron - muscle stiffness have spread from - pron - neck to the rest of - pron - body , and - pron - limb sometimes jerk involuntarily .
in addition , cora 's cognitive symptom be worsen .
at this point , cora 's doctor become very concerned and order more test on the csf sample .

what type of microorganism could be cause cora 's symptom ?
clinical focus two  six chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
the role of genetics in modern taxonomy haeckel 's and whittaker 's tree present hypothesis about the phylogeny of different organism base on readily observable characteristic .
but the advent of molecular genetic in the late two  zero th century reveal other way to organize phylogenetic tree .
genetic method allow for a standardized way to compare all live organism without rely on observable characteristic that can often be subjective .
modern taxonomy rely heavily on compare the nucleic acid ( deoxyribonucleic acid [ dna ] or ribonucleic acid [ rna ] ) or protein from different organism .
the more similar the nucleic acid and protein be between two organism , the more closely related - pron - be consider to be .
in the one  nine  seven  zero , american microbiologist carl woese discover what appear to be a " living record " of the evolution of organism .
- pron - and - pron - collaborator george fox create a genetics - base tree of life base on similarity and difference - pron - observe in the gene sequence code for small subunit ribosomal rna ( rrna ) of different organism .
in the process , - pron - discover that a certain type of bacteria , call archaebacteria ( now know simply as archaea ) , be significantly different from other bacteria and eukaryote in term of - pron - small subunit rrna gene sequence .
to accommodate this difference , - pron - create a tree with three domains above the level of kingdom 
archaea , bacteria , and eukarya ( figure one  .  one  one ) .
analysis of small subunit rrna gene sequence suggest archaea , bacteria , and eukaryote all evolve from a common ancestral cell type .
the tree be skewed to show a closer evolutionary relationship between archaea and eukarya than - pron - have to bacteria .
figure one  .  one  one woese and fox 's phylogenetic tree contain three domain  bacteria , archaea , and eukarya .
domains archaea and bacteria contain all prokaryotic organism , and eukarya contain all eukaryotic organism .
( credit  modification of work by eric gaba )
scientist continue to use analysis of rna , dna , and protein to determine how organism be relate .
one interesting , and complicating , discovery be that of horizontal gene transfer - when a gene of one specie be absorb into another organism 's genome .
horizontal gene transfer be especially common in microorganism and can make - pron - difficult to determine how organism be evolutionarily relate .
consequently , some scientist now think in term of " webs of life " rather than “ tree of life .
"
chapter one  an invisible world
two  seven 
in modern taxonomy , how do scientist determine how closely two organism be relate ?

explain why the branch on the “ tree of life
" all originate from a single “ trunk .
"
name microbes
in develop - pron - taxonomy , linnaeus use a system of binomial nomenclature , a two - word naming system for identify organism by genus and specie .
for example , modern human be in the genus homo and have the specie name sapien , so - pron - scientific name in binomial nomenclature be homo sapien .
in binomial nomenclature , the genus part of the name be always capitalize  - pron - be follow by the specie name , which be not capitalize .
both name be italicize .
taxonomic name in the one  eight th through two  zero th century be typically derive from latin , since that be the common language use by scientist when taxonomic system be first create .
today , newly discover organism can be give name derive from latin , greek , or english .
sometimes these name reflect some distinctive trait of the organism  in other case , microorganism be name after the scientist who discover - pron - .
the archaeon haloquadratum walsbyi be an example of both of these naming scheme .
the genus , haloquadratum , describe the microorganism 's saltwater habitat ( halo be derive from the greek word for “ salt " ) as well as the arrangement of - pron - square cell , which be arrange in square cluster of four cell ( quadratum be latin for “ foursquare " ) .
the specie , walsbyi , be name after anthony edward walsby , the microbiologist who discover haloquadratum walsbyi in in one  nine  eight  zero .
while - pron - may seem easy to give an organism a common descriptive name - like a redheaded woodpecker - - pron - can imagine how that could become problematic .
what happen when another species of woodpecker with red head coloring be discover ?
the systematic nomenclature scientist use eliminate this potential problem by assign each organism a single , unique two - word name that be recognize by scientist all over the world .
in this text , - pron - will typically abbreviate an organism 's genus and specie after - pron - first mention .
the abbreviate form be simply the first initial of the genus , follow by a period and the full name of the specie .
for example , the bacterium escherichia coli be shorten to e . coli in - pron - abbreviate form .
- pron - will encounter this same convention in other scientific text as well .
bergey 's manuals
whether in a tree or a web , microbe can be difficult to identify and classify .
without easily observable macroscopic feature like feather , foot , or fur , scientist must capture , grow , and devise way to study - pron - biochemical property to differentiate and classify microbe .
despite these hurdle , a group of microbiologist create and update a set of manual for identify and classify microorganism .
first publish in one  nine  two  three and since update many time , bergey 's manual of determinative bacteriology and bergey 's manual of systematic bacteriology be the standard reference for identify and classify different prokaryote .
( appendix d of this textbook be partly base on bergey 's manual  - pron - show how the organism that appear in this textbook be classify . )
because so many bacteria look identical , method base on nonvisual characteristic must be use to identify - pron - .
for example , biochemical test can be use to identify chemical unique to certain specie .
likewise , serological test can be use to identify specific antibody that will react against the protein find in certain specie .
ultimately , dna and rrna sequencing can be use both for identify a particular bacterial specie and for classifying newly discover specie .

what be binomial nomenclature and
why be - pron - a useful tool for name organism ?
two  eight chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
explain why a resource like one of bergey 's manual would be helpful in identify a microorganism in a sample .
same name , different strain
within one specie of microorganism , there can be several subtype call strain .
while different strain may be nearly identical genetically , - pron - can have very different attribute .
the bacterium escherichia coli be infamous for cause food poisoning and traveler 's diarrhea .
however , there be actually many different strain of e . coli , and - pron - vary in - pron - ability to cause disease .
one pathogenic ( disease - cause )
e . coli strain that - pron - may have hear of be e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven .
in human , infection from e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven can cause abdominal cramp and diarrhea .
infection usually originate from contaminated water or food , particularly raw vegetable and undercooked meat .
in the one  nine  nine  zero , there be several large outbreak of e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven think to have originate in undercooked hamburger .
while e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven and some other strain have give e . coli a bad name , most e . coli strain do not cause disease .
in fact , some can be helpful .
different strain of e . coli find naturally in - pron - gut help - pron - digest - pron - food , provide - pron - with some need chemical , and fight against pathogenic microbe .
learn more about phylogenetic tree by explore the wellcome trust 's interactive tree of life .
the website ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two wellcome ) contain information , photo , and animation about many different organism .
select two organism to see how - pron - be evolutionarily relate .
one  .  three type of microorganisms learning objectives
 list the various type of microorganism and describe - pron - defining characteristic 
give example of different type of cellular and viral microorganism and infectious agent 
describe the similarity and difference between archaea and bacteria
 provide an overview of the field of microbiology
most microbe be unicellular and small enough that - pron - require artificial magnification to be see .
however , there be some unicellular microbe that be visible to the naked eye , and some multicellular organism that be microscopic .
an object must measure about one  zero  zero micrometer ( μm ) to be visible without a microscope , but most microorganism be many time small than that .
for some perspective , consider that a typical animal cell measure roughly one  zero μm across but be still microscopic .
bacterial cell be typically about one μm , and virus can be one  zero time small than bacteria ( figure one  .  one  two ) .
see table one  .  one for unit of length use in microbiology .
micro connections link to learn chapter one
 an invisible world two  nine figure one  .  one  two
the relative size of various microscopic and nonmicroscopic object .
note that a typical virus measure about one  zero  zero nm , one  zero time small than a typical bacterium ( ~ one μm ) , which be at least one  zero time small than a typical plant or animal cell ( ~ one  zero – one  zero  zero μm ) .
an object must measure about one  zero  zero μm to be visible without a microscope .
unit of length
commonly use in microbiology metric unit meaning of prefix metric equivalent meter ( m )
- one m
= one  zero  zero m decimeter ( dm ) one  /  one  zero one dm = zero  .  one
m = one  zero − one m centimeter ( cm )
one  /  one  zero  zero
one cm = zero  .  zero  one
m =
one  zero − two m millimeter ( mm ) one  /  one  zero  zero  zero one mm =
zero  .  zero  zero  one m =
one  zero − three m micrometer ( μm ) one  /  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero one μm = zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one m =
one  zero − six m nanometer ( nm )
one  /  one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero one
nm =
zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one m = one  zero − nine m table one  .  one microorganisms differ from each other not only in size , but also in structure , habitat , metabolism , and many other characteristic .
while - pron - typically think of microorganism as be unicellular , there be also many multicellular organism that be too small to be see without a microscope .
some microbe , such as virus , be even acellular ( not compose of cell ) .
microorganism be find in each of the three domain of life 
archaea , bacteria , and eukarya .
microbe within the domain bacteria and archaea be all prokaryote ( - pron - cell lack a nucleus ) , whereas microbe in the domain
eukarya be eukaryote ( - pron - cell have a nucleus ) .
some microorganism , such as virus , do not fall within any of the three domain of life .
in this section , - pron - will briefly introduce each of the broad group of microbe .
later chapter will go into great depth about the diverse specie within each group .
three  zero chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
how big be a bacterium or a virus compare to other object ?
check out this interactive website ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two relsize ) to get a feel for the scale of different microorganism .
prokaryotic microorganisms bacteria be find in nearly every habitat on earth , include within and on human .
most bacteria be harmless or helpful , but some be pathogen , cause disease in human and other animal .
bacteria be prokaryotic because - pron - genetic material ( dna ) be not house within a true nucleus .
most bacteria have cell wall that contain peptidoglycan .
bacteria be often describe in term of - pron - general shape .
common shape include spherical ( coccus ) , rod - shaped ( bacillus ) , or curve ( spirillum , spirochete , or vibrio ) .
figure one  .  one  three show example of these shape .
figure one  .  one  three
common bacterial shape .
note how coccobacillus be a combination of spherical ( coccus ) and rodshape ( bacillus ) .
( credit “
coccus " 
modification of work by janice haney carr , centers for disease control and prevention  credit “
coccobacillus
" 
modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ spirochete
" 
center for disease control and prevention )
- pron - have a wide range of metabolic capability and can grow in a variety of environment , use different combination of nutrient .
some bacteria be photosynthetic , such as oxygenic cyanobacteria and anoxygenic green sulfur and green nonsulfur bacteria  these bacteria use energy derive from sunlight , and fix carbon dioxide for growth .
other type of bacteria be nonphotosynthetic , obtain - pron - energy from organic or inorganic compound in - pron - environment .
archaea be also unicellular prokaryotic organism .
archaea and bacteria have different evolutionary history , as well as significant difference in genetic , metabolic pathway , and the composition of - pron - cell wall and membrane .
unlike most bacteria , archaeal cell wall do not contain peptidoglycan , but - pron - cell wall be often compose of a similar substance call pseudopeptidoglycan .
like bacteria , archaea be find in nearly every habitat on earth , even extreme environment that be very cold , very hot , very basic , or very acidic ( figure one  .  one  four ) .
some archaea live in the human body , but none have be show to be human pathogen .
link to learn chapter one  an invisible world three  one figure one  .  one  four
some archaea live in extreme environment , such as the morning glory pool , a hot spring in yellowstone national park .
the color difference in the pool result from the different community of microbe that be able to thrive at various water temperature .

what be the two main type of prokaryotic organism ?

name some of the defining characteristic of each type .
eukaryotic microorganisms
the domain eukarya contain all eukaryote , include uni - or multicellular eukaryote such as protist , fungus , plant , and animal .
the major defining characteristic of eukaryote be that - pron - cell contain a nucleus .
protist protists be an informal grouping of eukaryote that be not plant , animal , or fungi .
algae and protozoa be example of protist .
algae ( singular  alga ) be protist that can be either unicellular or multicellular and vary widely in size , appearance , and habitat ( figure one  .  one  five ) .
- pron - cell be surround by cell wall make of cellulose , a type of carbohydrate .
algae be photosynthetic organism that extract energy from the sun and release oxygen and carbohydrate into - pron - environment .
because other organism can use - pron - waste product for energy , algae be important part of many ecosystem .
many consumer product contain ingredient derive from algae , such as carrageenan or alginic acid , which be find in some brand of ice cream , salad dressing , beverage , lipstick , and toothpaste .
a derivative of algae also play a prominent role in the microbiology laboratory .
agar , a gel derive from algae , can be mix with various nutrient and use to grow microorganism in a petri dish .
algae be also be develop as a possible source for biofuel .
three  two chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  .  one  five assorted diatom , a kind of algae , live in annual sea ice in mcmurdo sound , antarctica .
diatom range in size from two μm to two  zero  zero μm and be visualized here use light microscopy .
( credit  modification of work by national oceanic and atmospheric administration )
protozoa ( singular  protozoan ) be protist that make up the backbone of many food webs by provide nutrient for other organism .
protozoa be very diverse .
some protozoa move with help from hair - like structure call cilia or whip - like structure call flagella .
other extend part of - pron - cell membrane and cytoplasm to propel - pron - forward .
these cytoplasmic extension be call pseudopod ( " false foot " ) .
some protozoa be photosynthetic  other feed on organic material .
some be free - living , whereas other be parasitic , only able to survive by extract nutrient from a host organism .
most protozoa be harmless , but some be pathogen that can cause disease in animal or human ( figure one  .  one  six ) .
figure one  .  one  six
giardia lamblia , an intestinal protozoan parasite that infect human and other mammal , cause severe diarrhea .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) fungi fungi ( singular  fungus ) be also eukaryote .
some multicellular fungi , such as mushroom , resemble plant , but - pron - be actually quite different .
fungus be not photosynthetic , and - pron - cell wall be usually make out of chitin rather than cellulose .
unicellular fungi - yeast - be include within the study of microbiology .
there be more than one  zero  zero  zero know specie .
yeast be find in many different environment , from the deep sea to the human navel .
some yeast have beneficial chapter one  an invisible world three  three use , such as cause bread to rise and beverage to ferment  but yeast can also cause food to spoil .
some even cause disease , such as vaginal yeast infection and oral thrush ( figure one  .  one  seven ) .
figure one  .  one  seven candida albican be a unicellular fungus , or yeast .
- pron - be the causative agent of vaginal yeast infection as well as oral thrush , a yeast infection of the mouth that commonly afflict infant .
c . albican have a morphology similar to that of coccus bacteria  however , yeast be a eukaryotic organism ( note the nucleus ) and be much large .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
other fungi of interest to microbiologist be multicellular organism call mold .
mold be make up of long filament that form visible colony ( figure one  .  one  eight ) .
mold be find in many different environment , from soil to rot food to dank bathroom corner .
mold play a critical role in the decomposition of dead plant and animal .
some mold can cause allergy , and other produce disease - cause metabolite call mycotoxin .
mold have be use to make pharmaceutical , include penicillin , which be one of the most commonly prescribe antibiotic , and cyclosporine , use to prevent organ rejection follow a transplant .
figure one  .  one  eight
large colony of microscopic fungi can often be observe with the naked eye , as see on the surface of these moldy orange .

name two type of protist and two type of fungi .
three  four chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  name some of the defining characteristic of each type .
helminths multicellular parasitic worm call helminth be not technically microorganism , as most be large enough to see without a microscope .
however , these worm fall within the field of microbiology because disease cause by helminth involve microscopic egg and larvae .
one example of a helminth be the guinea worm , or dracunculus medinensis , which cause dizziness , vomiting , diarrhea , and painful ulcer on the leg and foot when the worm work - pron - way out of the skin ( figure one  .  one  nine ) .
infection typically occur after a person drink water contain water flea infect by guinea - worm larvae .
in the mid -  one  nine  eight  zero , there be an estimate three  .  five million case of guinea - worm disease , but the disease have be largely eradicate .
in two  zero  one  four , there be only one  two  six case report , thank to the coordinated effort of the world health organization ( who ) and other group commit to improvement in drinking water sanitation . [ one  one ][ one  two ] figure one  .  one  nine ( a )
the beef tapeworm , taenia saginata , infect both cattle and human .
t . saginata egg be microscopic ( around five  zero μm ) , but adult worm like the one show here can reach four – one  zero m , take up residence in the digestive system .
( b )
an adult guinea worm , dracunculus medinensis , be remove through a lesion in the patient 's skin by wind - pron - around a matchstick .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
viruses viruses be acellular microorganism , which mean - pron - be not compose of cell .
essentially , a virus consist of protein and genetic material - either dna or rna , but never both - that be inert outside of a host organism .
however , by incorporate - pron - into a host cell , virus be able to co - opt the host 's cellular mechanism to multiply and infect other host .
virus can infect all type of cell , from human cell to the cell of other microorganism .
in human , virus be responsible for numerous disease , from the common cold to deadly ebola ( figure one  .  two  zero ) .
however , many virus do not cause disease .
one  one .
c . greenaway
“ dracunculiasis ( guinea worm disease ) .
"
canadian medical association journal one  seven  zero
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  four  )  four  nine  five – five  zero  zero .
one  two .
world health organization .
“
dracunculiasis ( guinea - worm disease ) .
"
who . two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheets / fs three  five  nine  / en / . accessed october two , two  zero  one  five .
chapter one  an invisible world three  five figure one  .  two  zero ( a ) member of the coronavirus family can cause respiratory infection like the common cold , severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , and middle east respiratory syndrome ( mers ) .
here - pron - be view under a transmission electron microscope ( tem ) .
( b ) ebolavirus , a member of the filovirus family , as visualized use a tem .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by thomas w . geisbert )

be helminth microorganism ?
explain why or why not .

how be virus different from other microorganism ?
microbiology as a field of study microbiology be a broad term that encompass the study of all different type of microorganism .
but in practice , microbiologist tend to specialize in one of several subfield .
for example , bacteriology be the study of bacteria  mycology be the study of fungi  protozoology be the study of protozoa  parasitology be the study of helminth and other parasite  and virology be the study of virus ( figure one  .  two  one ) .
immunology , the study of the immune system , be often include in the study of microbiology because host – pathogen interaction be central to - pron - understanding of infectious disease process .
microbiologist can also specialize in certain area of microbiology , such as clinical microbiology , environmental microbiology , applied microbiology , or food microbiology .
in this textbook , - pron - be primarily concerned with clinical application of microbiology , but since the various subfield of microbiology be highly interrelated , - pron - will often discuss application that be not strictly clinical .
three  six chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  .  two  one
a virologist sample egg from this nest to be test for the influenza a virus , which cause avian flu in bird .
( credit  u . s . fish and wildlife service ) bioethics in microbiology
in the one  nine  four  zero , the u . s . government be look for a solution to a medical problem  the prevalence of sexually transmit disease ( std ) among soldier .
several now - infamous government - fund study use human subject to research common std and treatment .
in one such study , american researcher intentionally expose more than one  three  zero  zero human subject in guatemala to syphilis , gonorrhea , and chancroid to determine the ability of penicillin and other antibiotic to combat these disease .
subject of the study include guatemalan soldier , prisoner , prostitute , and psychiatric patient - none of whom be inform that - pron - be take part in the study .
researcher expose subject to std by various method , from facilitate intercourse with infect prostitute to inoculate subject with the bacteria know to cause the disease .
this latter method involve make a small wound on the subject 's genital or elsewhere on the body , and then put bacteria directly into the wound . [ one  three ]
in two  zero  one  one , a u . s . government commission task with investigate the experiment reveal that only some of the subject be treat with penicillin , and eight  three subject die by one  nine  five  three , likely as a result of the study . [ one  four ]
unfortunately , this be one of many horrific example of microbiology experiment that have violate basic ethical standard .
even if this study have lead to a life - save medical breakthrough ( - pron - do not ) , few would argue that - pron - method be ethically sound or morally justifiable .
but not every case be so clear cut .
professional work in clinical setting be frequently confront with ethical dilemma , such as work with patient who decline a vaccine or life - save blood transfusion .
these be just two example of life - and - death decision that eye on ethics chapter one  an invisible world three  seven may intersect with the religious and philosophical belief of both the patient and the health - care professional .
no matter how noble the goal , microbiology study and clinical practice must be guide by a certain set of ethical principle .
study must be do with integrity .
patient and research subject provide informed consent ( not only agree to be treat or study but demonstrate an understanding of the purpose of the study and any risk involve ) .
patient ' right must be respect .
procedure must be approve by an institutional review board .
when work with patient , accurate record - keeping , honest communication , and confidentiality be paramount .
animal use for research must be treat humanely , and all protocol must be approve by an institutional animal care and use committee .
these be just a few of the ethical principle explore in the eye on ethics box throughout this book .
resolution cora 's csf sample show no sign of inflammation or infection , as would be expect with a viral infection .
however , there be a high concentration of a particular protein , one  four - three - three protein , in - pron - csf .
an electroencephalogram ( eeg ) of - pron - brain function be also abnormal .
the eeg resemble that of a patient with a neurodegenerative disease like alzheimer 's or huntington 's , but cora 's rapid cognitive decline be not consistent with either of these .
instead , - pron - doctor conclude that cora have creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( cjd ) , a type of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy ( tse ) .
cjd be an extremely rare disease , with only about three  zero  zero case in the united states each year .
- pron - be not cause by a bacterium , fungus , or virus , but rather by prion - which do not fit neatly into any particular category of microbe .
like virus , prion be not find on the tree of life because - pron - be acellular .
prion be extremely small , about one - tenth the size of a typical virus .
- pron - contain no genetic material and be compose solely of a type of abnormal protein .
cjd can have several different cause .
- pron - can be acquire through exposure to the brain or nervoussystem tissue of an infected person or animal .
consume meat from an infected animal be one way such exposure can occur .
there have also be rare case of exposure to cjd through contact with contaminate surgical equipment[ one  five ] and from cornea and growth - hormone donor who unknowingly have cjd . [ one  six ][ one  seven ]
in rare case , the disease result from a specific genetic mutation that can sometimes be hereditary .
however , in approximately eight  five % of patient with cjd , the cause of the disease be spontaneous ( or sporadic ) and have no identifiable cause . [ one  eight ] base on - pron - symptom and - pron - rapid progression , cora be diagnose with sporadic cjd .
unfortunately for cora , cjd be a fatal disease for which there be no approve treatment .
approximately nine  zero % of patient die within one year of diagnosis . [ one  nine ]
- pron - doctor focus on limit - pron - pain and cognitive symptom as - pron - disease progress .
eight month later , cora die .
- pron - cjd diagnosis be confirm with a brain autopsy .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  three .
kara rogers .
“
guatemala syphilis experiment  american medical research project " .
encylopaedia britannica .
http / / www . britannica . com / event / guatemala - syphilis - experiment .
access june two  four , two  zero  one  five .
one  four .
susan donaldson james .
“
syphilis experiments shock ,
but
so do third - world drug trials .
”
abc world news .
august three  zero , two  zero  one  one .
http / / abcnews . go . com / health / guatemala - syphilis - experiments - shock - us - drug - trials - exploit / story ? id= one  four  four  one  four  nine  zero  two .
accessed june two  four , two  zero  one  five .
one  five .
greg botelho .
“
case of creutzfeldt - jakob disease confirmed in new hampshire .
" cnn .
two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . cnn . com /  two  zero  one  three  /  zero  nine  /  two  zero  / health / creutzfeldt - jakob - brain - disease / . one  six .
p . rudge et al .
“
iatrogenic
cjd
due to pituitary - derive growth hormone with genetically determine incubation times of up to four  zero year .
"
brain one  three  eight
no . one  one ( two  zero  one  five )
 three  three  eight  six – three  three  nine  nine .
one  seven .
j . g . heckmann et al .
“
transmission of creutzfeldt - jakob disease via a corneal transplant .
" journal of neurology , neurosurgery and psychiatry six  three
no .
three ( one  nine  nine  seven )  three  eight  eight – three  nine  zero .
three  eight chapter one  an invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five summary one  .  one
what - pron - ancestor knew  microorganisms ( or microbe ) be live organism that be generally too small to be see without a microscope .

throughout history , human have use microbe to make fermented food such as beer , bread , cheese , and wine .

long before the invention of the microscope , some people theorize that infection and disease be spread by live thing that be too small to be see .
- pron - also correctly intuit certain principle regard the spread of disease and immunity .
 antonie van leeuwenhoek , use a microscope , be the first to actually describe observation of bacteria , in one  six  seven  five .

during the golden age of microbiology ( one  eight  five  seven – one  nine  one  four ) , microbiologist , include louis pasteur and robert koch , discover many new connection between the field of microbiology and medicine .
one  .  two
a systematic approach

carolus linnaeus develop a taxonomic system for categorize organism into related group .

binomial nomenclature assign organism latinize scientific name with a genus and specie designation .

a phylogenetic tree be a way of show how different organism be think to be relate to one another from an evolutionary standpoint .

the first phylogenetic tree contain kingdom for plant and animal  ernst haeckel propose add kingdom for protist .

robert whittaker 's tree contain five kingdom  animalia , plantae , protista , fungi , and monera .

carl woese use small subunit ribosomal rna to create a phylogenetic tree that group organism into three domain base on - pron - genetic similarity .

bergey 's manual of determinative and systemic bacteriology be the standard reference for identify and classify bacteria , respectively .

bacteria can be identify through biochemical test , dna / rna analysis , and serological testing method .
one  .  three type of microorganisms 
microorganisms be very diverse and be find in all three domain of life 
archaea , bacteria , and eukarya .

archaea and bacteria be classify as prokaryote because - pron - lack a cellular nucleus .
archaea differ from bacteria in evolutionary history , genetic , metabolic pathway , and cell wall and membrane composition .

archaea inhabit nearly every environment on earth , but no archaea have be identify as human pathogen .

eukaryotes study in microbiology include algae , protozoa , fungus , and helminth .

algae be plant - like organism that can be either unicellular or multicellular , and derive energy via photosynthesis .

protozoa be unicellular organism with complex cell structure  most be motile .
 microscopic fungi include mold and yeast .

helminth be multicellular parasitic worm .
- pron - be include in the field of microbiology because - pron - egg and larvae be often microscopic .

virus be acellular microorganism that require a host to reproduce .

the field of microbiology be extremely broad .
microbiologist typically specialize in one of many subfield , but all health professional need a solid foundation in clinical microbiology .
one  eight .
national institute of neurological disorders and stroke .
“
creutzfeldt - jakob disease fact sheet .
" nih . two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . ninds . nih . gov / disorder / cjd
/ detail_cjd . htm# two  eight  eight  one  three  three  zero  five  eight .
one  nine .
national institute of neurological disorders and stroke .
“
creutzfeldt - jakob disease fact sheet .
" nih . two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . ninds . nih . gov /
chapter two
how - pron - see the invisible world figure two  .  one different type of microscopy be use to visualize different structure .
brightfield microscopy ( leave ) render a dark image on a light background , produce a clear image of these bacillus anthracis cell in cerebrospinal fluid ( the rod - shape bacterial cell be surround by large white blood cell ) .
darkfield microscopy ( right ) increase contrast , render a bright image on a dark background , as demonstrate by this image of the bacterium borrelia burgdorferi , which cause lyme disease .
( credit leave  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit right 
modification of work by american society for microbiology ) chapter outline two  .  one
the properties of light two  .  two peering into the invisible world two  .  three instruments of microscopy
two  .  four staining microscopic specimens introduction
when - pron - look at a rainbow , - pron - color span the full spectrum of light that the human eye can detect and differentiate .
each hue represent a different frequency of visible light , process by - pron - eye and brain and render as red , orange , yellow , green , or one of the many other familiar color that have always be a part of the human experience .
but only recently have human develop an understanding of the property of light that allow - pron - to see image in color .
over the past several century , - pron - have learn to manipulate light to peer into previously invisible world - those too small or too far away to be see by the naked eye .
through a microscope , - pron - can examine microbial cell and colony , use various technique to manipulate color , size , and contrast in way that help - pron - identify specie and diagnose disease .
figure two  .  one illustrate how - pron - can apply the property of light to visualize and magnify image  but these stunning micrograph be just two example of the numerous type of image - pron - be now able to produce with different microscopic technology .
this chapter explore how various type of microscope manipulate light in order to provide a window into the world of microorganism .
by understand how various kind of microscope work , - pron - can produce highly detailed image of microbe that can be useful for both research and clinical application .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world four  three two  .  one
the properties of light learning objectives  identify and define the characteristic of electromagnetic radiation ( emr ) use in microscopy

explain how lense be use in microscopy to manipulate visible and ultraviolet ( uv )
light visible light consist of electromagnetic wave that behave like other wave .
hence , many of the property of light that be relevant to microscopy can be understand in term of light 's behavior as a wave .
an important property of light wave be the wavelength , or the distance between one peak of a wave and the next peak .
the height of each peak ( or depth of each trough ) be call the amplitude .
in contrast , the frequency of the wave be the rate of vibration of the wave , or the number of wavelength within a specified time period ( figure two  .  two ) .
figure two  .  two ( a )
the amplitude be the height of a wave , whereas the wavelength be the distance between one peak and the next .
( b )
these wave have different frequency , or rate of vibration .
the wave at the top have the low frequency , since - pron - have the few peak per unit time .
the wave at the bottom have the high frequency .
interaction of light light wave interact with material by be reflect , absorb , or transmit .
reflection occur when a wave bounce off of a material .
for example , a red piece of cloth may reflect red light to - pron - eye while absorb other color of light .
absorbance occur when a material capture the energy of a light wave .
in the case of glow - in - thedark plastic , the energy from light can be absorb and then later re - emitted as another form of phosphorescence .
transmission occur when a wave travel through a material , like light through glass ( the process of transmission be call transmittance ) .
when a material allow a large proportion of light to be transmit , - pron - may do so because - pron - be thin , or more transparent ( have more transparency and less opacity ) .
figure two  .  three illustrate the difference
part one cindy , a one  seven  - year - old counselor at a summer sport camp , scrap - pron - knee play basketball two week ago .
at the time , - pron - think - pron - be only a minor abrasion that would heal , like many other before - pron - .
instead , the wound begin to look like an insect bite and have continue to become increasingly painful and swollen .
the camp nurse examine the lesion and observe a large amount of pus ooze from the surface .
concerned that cindy may have develop a potentially aggressive infection , - pron - swab the wound to collect a sample from the infection site .
then - pron - clean out the pus and dress the wound , instruct cindy to keep the area clean and to come back the next day .
when cindy leave , the nurse send the sample to the close medical lab to be analyze under a microscope .

what be some thing - pron - can learn about these bacteria by look at - pron - under a microscope ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus four  four chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five between transparency and opacity .
figure two  .  three ( a )
a petri dish be make of transparent plastic or glass , which allow transmission of a high proportion of light .
this transparency allow - pron - to see through the side of the dish to view the content .
( b )
this slice of an iron meteorite be opaque ( i . e . , - pron - have opacity ) .
light be not transmit through the material , make - pron - impossible to see the part of the hand cover by the object .
( credit a  modification of work by umberto salvagnin  credit b  modification of work by “ waifer x” / flickr )
light wave can also interact with each other by interference , create complex pattern of motion .
drop two pebble into a puddle cause the wave on the puddle 's surface to interact , create complex interference pattern .
light wave can interact in the same way .
in addition to interfere with each other , light wave can also interact with small object or opening by bend or scattering .
this be call diffraction .
diffraction be large when the object be small relative to the wavelength of the light ( the distance between two consecutive peak of a light wave ) .
often , when wave diffract in different direction around an obstacle or opening , - pron - will interfere with each other .

if a light wave have a long wavelength , be - pron - likely to have a low or high frequency ?

if an object be transparent , do - pron - reflect , absorb , or transmit light ?
lense and refraction
in the context of microscopy , refraction be perhaps the most important behavior exhibit by light wave .
refraction occur when light wave change direction as - pron - enter a new medium ( figure two  .  four ) .
different transparent material transmit light at different speed  thus , light can change speed when pass from one material to another .
this change in speed usually also cause a change in direction ( refraction ) , with the degree of change dependent on the angle of the incoming light .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world four  five figure two  .  four ( a ) refraction occur when light pass from one medium , such as air , to another , such as glass , change the direction of the light ray .
( b )
as show in this diagram , light ray pass from one medium to another may be either refract or reflect .
the extent to which a material slow transmission speed relative to empty space be call the refractive index of that material .
large difference between the refractive index of two material will result in a large amount of refraction when light pass from one material to the other .
for example , light move much more slowly through water than through air , so light enter water from air can change direction greatly .
- pron - say that the water have a high refractive index than air ( figure two  .  five ) .
figure two  .  five
this straight pole appear to bend at an angle as - pron - enter the water .
this optical illusion be due to the large difference between the refractive index of air and water .
when light cross a boundary into a material with a high refractive index , - pron - direction turn to be close to perpendicular to the boundary ( i . e . , more toward a normal to that boundary  see figure two  .  five ) .
this be the principle behind lense .
- pron - can think of a lens as an object with a curved boundary ( or a collection of prism ) that collect all of the light that strike - pron - and refract - pron - so that - pron - all meet at a single point call the image point ( focus ) .
a convex lens can be use to magnify because - pron - can focus at close range than the human eye , produce a large image .
concave lense and mirror can also be use in microscope to redirect the light path .
figure two  .  six show the focal point ( the image point when light enter the lens be parallel ) and the focal length ( the distance to the focal point ) for convex and concave lense .
four  six chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  six
( a )
a lens be like a collection of prism , such as the one show here .
( b ) when light pass through a convex lens , - pron - be refract toward a focal point on the other side of the lens .
the focal length be the distance to the focal point .
( c ) light pass through a concave lens be refract away from a focal point in front of the lens .
the human eye contain a lens that enable - pron - to see image .
this lens focus the light reflect off of object in front of the eye onto the surface of the retina , which be like a screen in the back of the eye .
artificial lense place in front of the eye ( contact lense , glass , or microscopic lense ) focus light before - pron - be focused ( again ) by the lens of the eye , manipulate the image that end up on the retina ( e . g . , by make - pron - appear large ) .
image be commonly manipulate by control the distance between the object , the lens , and the screen , as well as the curvature of the lens .
for example , for a give amount of curvature , when an object be close to the lens , the focal point be farther from the lens .
as a result , - pron - be often necessary to manipulate these distance to create a focus image on a screen .
similarly , more curvature create image point closer to the lens and a large image when the image be in focus .
this property be often describe in term of the focal distance , or distance to the focal point .

explain how a lens focus light at the image point .

name some factor that affect the focal length of a lens .
electromagnetic spectrum and color visible light be just one form of electromagnetic radiation ( emr ) , a type of energy that be all around - pron - .
other form of emr include microwave , x - ray , and radio wave , among other .
the different type of emr fall on the electromagnetic spectrum , which be define in term of wavelength and frequency .
the spectrum of visible light occupy a relatively small range of frequency between infrared and ultraviolet light ( figure two  .  seven ) .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world four  seven figure two  .  seven
the electromagnetic spectrum range from high - frequency gamma ray to low - frequency radio wave .
visible light be the relatively small range of electromagnetic frequency that can be sense by the human eye .
on the electromagnetic spectrum , visible light fall between ultraviolet and infrared light .
( credit  modification of work by johannes ahlmann )
whereas wavelength represent the distance between adjacent peak of a light wave , frequency , in a simplified definition , represent the rate of oscillation .
wave with high frequency have short wavelength and , therefore , have more oscillation per unit time than low - frequency wave .
high - frequency wave also contain more energy than low - frequency wave .
this energy be deliver as elementary particle call photon .
high - frequency wave deliver more energetic photon than low - frequency wave .
photon with different energy interact differently with the retina .
in the spectrum of visible light , each color correspond to a particular frequency and wavelength ( figure two  .  seven  ) . the low frequency of visible light appear as the color red , whereas the high appear as the color violet .
when the retina receive visible light of many different frequency , - pron - perceive this as white light .
however , white light can be separate into - pron - component color use refraction .
if - pron - pass white light through a prism , different color will be refract in different direction , create a rainbow - like spectrum on a screen behind the prism .
this separation of color be call dispersion , and - pron - occur because , for a give material , the refractive index be different for different frequency of light .
certain material can refract nonvisible form of emr and , in effect , transform - pron - into visible light .
certain fluorescent dye , for instance , absorb ultraviolet or blue light and then use the energy to emit photon of a different color , give off light rather than simply vibrate .
this occur because the energy absorption cause electron to jump to high energy state , after which - pron - then almost immediately fall back down to - pron - ground state , emit specific amount of energy as photon .
not all of the energy be emit in a give photon , so the emitted photon will be of low energy and , thus , of low frequency than the absorb one .
thus , a dye such as texas red may be excite by blue light , but emit red light  or a dye such as fluorescein
isothiocyanate ( fitc ) may absorb ( invisible ) highenergy ultraviolet light and emit green light ( figure two  .  eight ) .
in some material , the photon may be emit follow a delay after absorption  in this case , the process be call phosphorescence .
glow - in - the - dark plastic work by use phosphorescent material .
four  eight chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  eight
the fluorescent dye absorb by these bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cell emit brilliant color when excite by ultraviolet light under a fluorescence microscope .
various cell structure absorb different dye .
the nucleus be stain blue with four ' ,  six  - diamidino -  two  - phenylindole ( dapi )  microtuble be mark green by an antibody bind to fitc  and actin filament be label red with phalloidin bind to tetramethylrhodamine ( tritc ) .
( credit  national institutes of health )

which have a high frequency  red light or green light ?

explain why dispersion occur when white light pass through a prism .

why do fluorescent dye emit a different color of light than - pron - absorb ?
magnification , resolution , and contrast microscopes magnify image and use the property of light to create useful image of small object .
magnification be define as the ability of a lens to enlarge the image of an object when compare to the real object .
for example , a magnification of one  zero ⨯ mean that the image appear one  zero time the size of the object as view with the naked eye .
great magnification typically improve - pron - ability to see detail of small object , but magnification alone be not sufficient to make the most useful image .
- pron - be often useful to enhance the resolution of object  the ability to tell that two separate point or object be separate .
a low - resolution image appear fuzzy , whereas a high - resolution image appear sharp .
two factor affect resolution .
the first be wavelength .
short wavelength be able to resolve small object  thus , an electron microscope have a much high resolution than a light microscope , since - pron - use an electron beam with a very short wavelength , as oppose to the long - wavelength visible light use by a light microscope .
the second factor that affect resolution be numerical aperture , which be a measure of a lens 's ability to gather light .
the high the numerical aperture , the well the resolution .
read this article ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two aperture ) to learn more about factor that can increase or decrease the numerical aperture of a lens .
even when a microscope have high resolution , - pron - can be difficult to distinguish small structure in many specimen link to learn chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world four  nine because microorganism be relatively transparent .
- pron - be often necessary to increase contrast to detect different structure in a specimen .
various type of microscope use different feature of light or electron to increase contrast - visible difference between the part of a specimen ( see instruments of microscopy ) .
additionally , dye that bind to some structure but not other can be use to improve the contrast between image of relatively transparent object ( see staining microscopic specimens ) .

explain the difference between magnification and resolution .

explain the difference between resolution and contrast .

name two factor that affect resolution .
two  .  two peer into the invisible world learning objectives 
describe historical development and individual contribution that lead to the invention and development of the microscope  compare and contrast the feature of simple and compound microscope
some of the fundamental characteristic and function of microscope can be understand in the context of the history of - pron - use .
italian scholar girolamo fracastoro be regard as the first person to formally postulate that disease be spread by tiny invisible seminaria , or " seed of the contagion .
"
in - pron - book de contagione ( one  five  four  six ) , - pron - propose that these seed could attach - pron - to certain object ( which - pron - call fome [ cloth ] ) that support - pron - transfer from person to person .
however , since the technology for see such tiny object do not yet exist , the existence of the seminaria remain hypothetical for a little over a century - an invisible world wait to be reveal .
early microscopes antonie van leeuwenhoek , sometimes hail as “ the father of microbiology , " be typically credit as the first person to have create microscope powerful enough to view microbe ( figure two  .  nine ) .
bear in the city of delft in the dutch republic , van leeuwenhoek begin - pron - career sell fabric .
however , - pron - later become interested in lens making ( perhaps to look at thread ) and - pron - innovative technique produce microscope that allow - pron - to observe microorganism as no one have before .
in one  six  seven  four , - pron - describe - pron - observation of single - celle organism , whose existence be previously unknown , in a series of letter to the royal society of london .
- pron - report be initially meet with skepticism , but - pron - claim be soon verify and - pron - become something of a celebrity in the scientific community .
five  zero chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  nine ( a ) antonie van leeuwenhoek ( one  six  three  two – one  seven  two  three ) be credit as be the first person to observe microbe , include bacteria , which - pron - call " animalcule " and " wee little beastie .
"
( b )
even though van leeuwenhoek 's microscope be simple microscope ( as see in this replica ) , - pron - be more powerful and provide well resolution than the compound microscope of - pron - day .
( c )
though more famous for develop the telescope , galileo galilei ( one  five  six  four – one  six  four  two ) be also one of the pioneer of microscopy .
( credit b  modification of work by
“ wellcome images” / wikimedia commons )
while van leeuwenhoek be credit with the discovery of microorganism , other before - pron - have contribute to the development of the microscope .
these include eyeglass maker in the netherlands in the late one  five  zero  zero , as well as the italian astronomer galileo galilei , who use a compound microscope to examine insect part ( figure two  .  nine ) .
whereas van leeuwenhoek use a simple microscope , in which light be pass through just one lens , galileo 's compound microscope be more sophisticated , pass light through two set of lense .
van leeuwenhoek 's contemporary , the englishman robert hooke ( one  six  three  five – one  seven  zero  three ) , also make important contribution to microscopy , publish in - pron - book micrographia ( one  six  six  five ) many observation use compound microscope .
view a thin sample of cork through - pron - microscope , - pron - be the first to observe the structure that - pron - now know as cell ( figure two  .  one  zero ) .
hooke describe these structure as resemble “ honey - comb , " and as " small boxes or bladders of air , " note that each “ cavern , bubble , or cell " be distinct from the other ( in latin , “ cell " literally mean “ small room " ) .
- pron - likely appear to hooke to be fill with air because the cork cell be dead , with only the rigid cell wall provide the structure .
figure two  .  one  zero
robert hooke use - pron - ( a ) compound microscope to view ( b ) cork cell .
both of these engraving be from - pron - seminal work micrographia , publish in one  six  six  five .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world five  one

explain the difference between simple and compound microscope .

compare and contrast the contribution of van leeuwenhoek , hooke , and galileo to early microscopy .
who invent the microscope ?
while antonie van leeuwenhoek and robert hooke generally receive much of the credit for early advance in microscopy , neither can claim to be the inventor of the microscope .
some argue that this designation should belong to hans and zaccharias janssen , dutch spectacle - maker who may have invent the telescope , the simple microscope , and the compound microscope during the late one  five  zero  zero or early one  six  zero  zero
( figure two  .  one  one ) .
unfortunately , little be know for sure about the janssens , not even the exact date of - pron - birth and death .
the janssens be secretive about - pron - work and never publish .
- pron - be also possible that the janssens do not invent anything at all  - pron - neighbor , hans lippershey , also develop microscope and telescope during the same time frame , and - pron - be often credit with invent the telescope .
the historical record from the time be as fuzzy and imprecise as the image view through those early lense , and any archived record have be lose over the century .
by contrast , van leeuwenhoek and hooke can thank ample documentation of - pron - work for - pron - respective legacy .
like janssen , van leeuwenhoek begin - pron - work in obscurity , leave behind few record .
however , - pron - friend , the prominent physician reinier de graaf , write a letter to the editor of the philosophical transactions of the royal society of london call attention to van leeuwenhoek 's powerful microscope .
from one  six  seven  three onward , van leeuwenhoek begin regularly submit letter to the royal society detail - pron - observation .
in one  six  seven  four , - pron - report describe single - celle organism produce controversy in the scientific community , but - pron - observation be soon confirm when the society send a delegation to investigate - pron - finding .
- pron - subsequently enjoy considerable celebrity , at one point even entertain a visit by the czar of russia .
similarly , robert hooke have - pron - observation use microscope publish by the royal society in a book call micrographia in one  six  six  five .
the book become a bestseller and greatly increase interest in microscopy throughout much of europe .
micro connections five  two chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  one  one
zaccharias janssen , along with - pron - father hans , may have invent the telescope , the simple microscope , and the compound microscope during the late one  five  zero  zero or early one  six  zero  zero .
the historical evidence be inconclusive .
two  .  three instrument of microscopy learning objectives  identify and describe the part of a brightfield microscope  calculate total magnification for a compound microscope 
describe the distinguish feature and typical use for various type of light microscope , electron microscope , and scan probe microscope
the early pioneer of microscopy open a window into the invisible world of microorganism .
but microscopy continue to advance in the century that follow .
in one  eight  three  zero , joseph jackson lister create an essentially modern light microscope .
the two  zero th century see the development of microscope that leverage nonvisible light , such as fluorescence microscopy , which use an ultraviolet light source , and electron microscopy , which use shortwavelength electron beam .
these advance lead to major improvement in magnification , resolution , and contrast .
by comparison , the relatively rudimentary microscope of van leeuwenhoek and - pron - contemporary be far less powerful than even the most basic microscope in use today .
in this section , - pron - will survey the broad range of modern microscopic technology and common application for each type of microscope .
light microscopy
many type of microscope fall under the category of light microscope , which use light to visualize image .
example of light microscope include brightfield microscope , darkfield microscope , phase - contrast microscope , differential interference contrast microscope , fluorescence microscope , confocal scan laser microscope , and two - photon microscope .
these various type of light microscope can be use to complement each other in diagnostic and research .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world five  three brightfield microscopes
the brightfield microscope , perhaps the most commonly use type of microscope , be a compound microscope with two or more lense that produce a dark image on a bright background .
some brightfield microscope be monocular ( have a single eyepiece ) , though most new brightfield microscope be binocular ( have two eyepiece ) , like the one show in figure two  .  one  two  in either case , each eyepiece contain a lens call an ocular lens .
the ocular lense typically magnify image one  zero time ( one  zero ⨯ ) .
at the other end of the body tube be a set of objective lense on a rotate nosepiece .
the magnification of these objective lense typically range from four ⨯ to one  zero  zero ⨯ , with the magnification for each lens designate on the metal case of the lens .
the ocular and objective lense work together to create a magnify image .
the total magnification be the product of the ocular magnification time the objective magnification  ocular magnificatio × objective magnificatio for example , if a four  zero ⨯ objective lens be select and the ocular lens be one  zero ⨯ , the total magnification would be ( four  zero × ) (  one  zero × ) = four  zero  zero × figure two  .  one  two component of a typical brightfield microscope .
the item be view be call a specimen .
the specimen be place on a glass slide , which be then clip into place on the stage ( a platform ) of the microscope .
once the slide be secure , the speciman on the slide be position over the light use the x - y mechanical stage knob .
these knob move the slide on the surface of the stage , but do not raise or lower the stage .
once the specimen be center over the light , the stage position can be raise or lower to focus the image .
the coarse focus knob be use for large - scale movement with four ⨯ and one  zero ⨯ objective lense  the fine focus knob be use for small - scale movement , especially with four  zero ⨯ or one  zero  zero ⨯ objective lense .
when image be magnify , - pron - become dimmer because there be less light per unit area of image .
highly magnified image produce by microscope , therefore , require intense lighting .
in a brightfield microscope , this light be provide by an illuminator , which be typically a high - intensity bulb below the stage .
light from the illuminator pass up through condens lens ( locate below the stage ) , which focus all of the light ray on the speciman to maximize illumination .
the position of the condenser can be optimize use the attach condenser focus knob  once the optimal distance be establish , the condenser should not be move to adjust the brightness .
if less - than - maximal light five  four chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five level be need , the amount of light strike the speciman can be easily adjust by opening or close a diaphragm between the condenser and the speciman .
in some case , brightness can also be adjust use the rheostat , a dimmer switch that control the intensity of the illuminator .
a brightfield microscope create an image by direct light from the illuminator at the speciman  this light be differentially transmit , absorb , reflect , or refract by different structure .
different color can behave differently as - pron - interact with chromophore ( pigment that absorb and reflect particular wavelength of light ) in part of the speciman .
often , chromophore be artificially add to the speciman use stain , which serve to increase contrast and resolution .
in general , structure in the speciman will appear darker , to various extent , than the bright background , create maximally sharp image at magnification up to about one  zero  zero  zero ⨯ . further magnification would create a large image , but without increase resolution .
this allow - pron - to see object as small as bacteria , which be visible at about four  zero  zero ⨯ or so , but not small object such as virus .
at very high magnification , resolution may be compromise when light pass through the small amount of air between the speciman and the lens .
this be due to the large difference between the refractive index of air and glass  the air scatter the light ray before - pron - can be focus by the lens .
to solve this problem , a drop of oil can be use to fill the space between the speciman and an oil immersion lens , a special lens design to be use with immersion oil .
since the oil have a refractive index very similar to that of glass , - pron - increase the maximum angle at which light leave the speciman can strike the lens .
this increase the light collect and , thus , the resolution of the image ( figure two  .  one  three ) .
a variety of oil can be use for different type of light .
figure two  .  one  three ( a ) oil immersion lense like this one be use to improve resolution .
( b )
because immersion oil and glass have very similar refractive index , there be a minimal amount of refraction before the light reach the lens .
without immersion oil , light scatter as - pron - pass through the air above the slide , degrade the resolution of the image .
microscope maintenance  good practices
even a very powerful microscope can not deliver high - resolution image if - pron - be not properly clean and maintain .
since lense be carefully design and manufacture to refract light with a high degree of precision , even a slightly dirty or scratched lens will refract light in unintended way , degrade the image of the speciman .
in addition , microscope be rather delicate instrument , and great care must be take to avoid damage part and surface .
among other thing , proper care of a microscope include the follow  micro connections chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
five  five  clean the lense with lens paper  not allow lense to contact the slide ( e . g . , by rapidly change the focus )  protect the bulb
( if there be one ) from breakage  not push an objective into a slide  not use the coarse focus knob when use the four  zero ⨯ or great objective lense  only use immersion oil with a specialized oil objective , usually the one  zero  zero ⨯ objective  cleaning oil from immersion lense after use the microscope  clean any oil accidentally transfer from other lense  cover the microscope or place - pron - in a cabinet when not in use visit the online resource link below for simulation and demonstration involve the use of microscope .
keep in mind that execution of specific technique and procedure can vary depend on the specific instrument - pron - be use .
thus , - pron - be important to learn and practice with an actual microscope in a laboratory set under expert supervision .

university of delaware 's virtual microscope ( https / / www . openstax . org / l / two  two virtualsim )

st . john 's university microscope tutorials ( https / / www . openstax . org / l / two  two microtut )
darkfield microscopy
a darkfield microscope be a brightfield microscope that have a small but significant modification to the condenser .
a small , opaque disk ( about one cm in diameter ) be place between the illuminator and the condenser lens .
this opaque light stop , as the disk be call , block most of the light from the illuminator as - pron - pass through the condenser on - pron - way to the objective lens , produce a hollow cone of light that be focus on the speciman .
the only light that reach the objective be light that have be refract or reflect by structure in the speciman .
the result image typically show bright object on a dark background ( figure two  .  one  four ) .
link to learning five  six chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  one  four
an opaque light stop insert into a brightfield microscope be use to produce a darkfield image .
the light stop block light travel directly from the illuminator to the objective lens , allow only light reflect or refract off the speciman to reach the eye .
darkfield microscopy can often create high - contrast , high - resolution image of specimen without the use of stain , which be particularly useful for view live specimen that may be kill or otherwise compromise by the stain .
for example , thin spirochete like treponema pallidum , the causative agent of syphilis , can be best view use a darkfield microscope ( figure two  .  one  five ) .
figure two  .  one  five use of a darkfield microscope allow - pron - to view living , unstained sample of the spirochete treponema pallidum .
similar to a photographic negative , the spirochete appear bright against a dark background .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )

identify the key difference between brightfield and darkfield microscopy .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
five  seven part two wound infection like cindy 's can be cause by many different type of bacteria , some of which can spread rapidly with serious complication .
identify the specific cause be very important to select a medication that can kill or stop the growth of the bacteria .
after call a local doctor about cindy 's case , the camp nurse send the sample from the wound to the close medical laboratory .
unfortunately , since the camp be in a remote area , the near lab be small and poorly equip .
a more modern lab would likely use other method to culture , grow , and identify the bacteria , but in this case , the technician decide to make a wet mount from the speciman and view - pron - under a brightfield microscope .
in a wet mount , a small drop of water be add to the slide , and a cover slip be place over the speciman to keep - pron - in place before - pron - be position under the objective lens .
under the brightfield microscope , the technician can barely see the bacteria cell because - pron - be nearly transparent against the bright background .
to increase contrast , the technician insert an opaque light stop above the illuminator .
the result darkfield image clearly show that the bacteria cell be spherical and group in cluster , like grape .

why be - pron - important to identify the shape and growth pattern of cell in a specimen ?

what other type of microscopy could be use effectively to view this specimen ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
phase - contrast microscopes phase - contrast microscope use refraction and interference cause by structure in a specimen to create highcontrast , high - resolution image without stain .
- pron - be the old and simple type of microscope that create an image by alter the wavelength of light ray pass through the speciman .
to create altered wavelength path , an annular stop be use in the condenser .
the annular stop produce a hollow cone of light that be focus on the speciman before reach the objective lens .
the objective contain a phase plate contain a phase ring .
as a result , light travel directly from the illuminator pass through the phase ring while light refract or reflect by the speciman pass through the plate .
this cause wave travel through the ring to be about one - half of a wavelength out of phase with those pass through the plate .
because wave have peak and trough , - pron - can add together ( if in phase together ) or cancel each other out ( if out of phase ) .
when the wavelength be out of phase , wave trough will cancel out wave peak , which be call destructive interference .
structure that refract light then appear dark against a bright background of only unrefracted light .
more generally , structure that differ in feature such as refractive index will differ in level of darkness ( figure two  .  one  six ) .
clinical focus five  eight chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  one  six
this diagram of a phase - contrast microscope illustrate phase difference between light pass through the object and background .
these difference be produce by pass the ray through different part of a phase plate .
the light ray be superimpose in the image plane , produce contrast due to - pron - interference .
because - pron - increase contrast without require stain , phase - contrast microscopy be often use to observe live specimen .
certain structure , such as organelle in eukaryotic cell and endospore in prokaryotic cell , be especially well visualized with phase - contrast microscopy ( figure two  .  one  seven ) .
figure two  .  one  seven
this figure compare a brightfield image ( leave ) with a phase - contrast image ( right ) of the same unstained simple squamous epithelial cell .
the cell be in the center and bottom right of each photograph ( the irregular item above the cell be acellular debris ) .
notice that the unstained cell in the brightfield image be almost invisible against the background , whereas the cell in the phase - contrast image appear to glow against the background , reveal far more detail .
differential interference contrast microscopes differential interference contrast ( dic ) microscope ( also know as nomarski optic ) be similar to phase - contrast chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world five  nine microscope in that - pron - use interference pattern to enhance contrast between different feature of a specimen .
in a dic microscope , two beam of light be create in which the direction of wave movement ( polarization ) differ .
once the beam pass through either the speciman or speciman - free space , - pron - be recombine and effect of the specimen cause difference in the interference pattern generate by the combining of the beam .
this result in high - contrast image of live organism with a three - dimensional appearance .
these microscope be especially useful in distinguish structure within live , unstained specimen .
( figure two  .  one  eight ) figure two  .  one  eight
a dic image of fonsecaea pedrosoi grow on modified leonian 's agar .
this fungus cause chromoblastomycosis , a chronic skin infection common in tropical and subtropical climate .

what be some advantage of phase - contrast and dic microscopy ?
fluorescence microscopes
a fluorescence microscope use fluorescent chromophore call fluorochrome , which be capable of absorb energy from a light source and then emit this energy as visible light .
fluorochrome include naturally fluorescent substance ( such as chlorophyll ) as well as fluorescent stain that be add to the speciman to create contrast .
dye such as texas red and fitc be example of fluorochrome .
other example include the nucleic acid dye four ' ,  six ' - diamidino -  two  - phenylindole ( dapi ) and acridine orange .
the microscope transmit an excitation light , generally a form of emr with a short wavelength , such as ultraviolet or blue light , toward the speciman  the chromophore absorb the excitation light and emit visible light with long wavelength .
the excitation light be then filter out ( in part because ultraviolet light be harmful to the eye ) so that only visible light pass through the ocular lens .
this produce an image of the speciman in bright color against a dark background .
fluorescence microscope be especially useful in clinical microbiology .
- pron - can be use to identify pathogen , to find particular specie within an environment , or to find the location of particular molecule and structure within a cell .
approach have also be develop to distinguish live from dead cell use fluorescence microscopy base upon whether - pron - take up particular fluorochrome .
sometimes , multiple fluorochrome be use on the same speciman to show different structure or feature .
one of the most important application of fluorescence microscopy be a technique call immunofluorescence , which be use to identify certain disease - cause microbe by observe whether antibody bind to - pron - .
( antibody be protein molecule produce by the immune system that attach to specific pathogen to kill or inhibit - pron - . )
there be two approach to this technique  direct immunofluorescence assay ( dfa ) and indirect immunofluorescence assay ( ifa ) .
in dfa , specific antibody ( e . g . , those that the target the rabie virus ) be stain with a fluorochrome .
if the six  zero chapter two  how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five speciman contain the targeted pathogen , one can observe the antibody bind to the pathogen under the fluorescent microscope .
this be call a primary antibody stain because the stained antibody attach directly to the pathogen .
in ifa , secondary antibody be stain with a fluorochrome rather than primary antibody .
secondary antibody do not attach directly to the pathogen , but - pron - do bind to primary antibody .
when the unstained primary antibody bind to the pathogen , the fluorescent secondary antibody can be observe bind to the primary antibody .
thus , the secondary antibody be attach indirectly to the pathogen .
since multiple secondary antibody can often attach to a primary antibody , ifa increase the number of fluorescent antibody attach to the speciman , make - pron - easy visualize feature in the speciman ( figure two  .  one  nine ) .
figure two  .  one  nine ( a )
a direct immunofluorescent stain be use to visualize neisseria gonorrhoeae , the bacterium that cause gonorrhea .
( b )
an indirect immunofluorescent stain be use to visualize larvae of schistosoma mansoni , a parasitic worm that cause schistosomiasis , an intestinal disease common in the tropic .
( c )
in direct immunofluorescence , the stain be absorb by a primary antibody , which bind to the antigen .
in indirect immunofluorescence , the stain be absorb by a secondary antibody , which bind to a primary antibody , which , in turn , bind to the antigen .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

why must fluorochrome be use to examine a specimen under a fluorescence microscope ?
confocal microscopes
whereas other form of light microscopy create an image that be maximally focus at a single distance from the observer ( the depth , or z - plane ) , a confocal microscope use a laser to scan multiple z - plane successively .
this produce numerous two - dimensional , high - resolution image at various depth , which can be construct into a threedimensional image by a computer .
as with fluorescence microscope , fluorescent stain be generally use to increase contrast and resolution .
image clarity be further enhance by a narrow aperture that eliminate any light that be not from the z - plane .
confocal microscope be thus very useful for examine thick specimen such as biofilm , which chapter two  how - pron - see the invisible world six  one can be examine alive and unfixed ( figure two  .  two  zero ) .
figure two  .  two  zero
confocal microscopy can be use to visualize structure such as this roof - dwell cyanobacterium biofilm .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
explore a rotate three - dimensional view ( https / / www . openstax . org / l / two  two biofilm three d ) of a biofilm as observe under a confocal microscope .
after navigate to the webpage , click the " play " button to launch the video .
two - photon microscope
while the original fluorescent and confocal microscope allow well visualization of unique feature in specimen , there be still problem that prevent optimum visualization .
the effective sensitivity of fluorescence microscopy when view thick specimen be generally limit by out - of - focus flare , which result in poor resolution .
this limitation be greatly reduce in the confocal microscope through the use of a confocal pinhole to reject out - of - focus background fluorescence with thin ( < one μm ) , unblurred optical section .
however , even the confocal microscope lack the resolution need for view thick tissue sample .
these problem be resolve with the development of the two - photon microscope , which use a scanning technique , fluorochrome , and long - wavelength light ( such as infrared ) to visualize specimen .
the low energy associate with the long - wavelength light mean that two photon must strike a location at the same time to excite the fluorochrome .
the low energy of the excitation light be less damaging to cell , and the long wavelength of the excitation light more easily penetrate deep into thick specimen .
this make the two - photon microscope useful for examine living cell within intact tissue - brain slice , embryo , whole organ , and even entire animal .
currently , use of two - photon microscope be limit to advance clinical and research laboratory because of the high cost of the instrument .
a single two - photon microscope typically cost between $ three  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and $ five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero , and the laser use to excite the dye use on specimen be also very expensive .
however , as technology improve , twophoton microscope may become more readily available in clinical setting .

what type of specimen be best examine use confocal or two - photon microscopy ?
link to learn six  two chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five electron microscopy
the maximum theoretical resolution of image create by light microscope be ultimately limit by the wavelength of visible light .
most light microscope can only magnify one  zero  zero  zero ⨯ , and a few can magnify up to one  five  zero  zero ⨯ , but this do not begin to approach the magnifying power of an electron microscope ( em ) , which use short - wavelength electron beam rather than light to increase magnification and resolution .
electron , like electromagnetic radiation , can behave as wave , but with wavelength of zero  .  zero  zero  five nm , - pron - can produce much well resolution than visible light .
an em can produce a sharp image that be magnify up to one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero ⨯ .
thus , em can resolve subcellular structure as well as some molecular structure ( e . g . , single strand of dna )  however , electron microscopy can not be use on live material because of the method need to prepare the specimen .
there be two basic type of em  the transmission electron microscope ( tem ) and the scan electron microscope ( sem )
( figure two  .  two  one ) .
the tem be somewhat analogous to the brightfield light microscope in term of the way - pron - function .
however , - pron - use an electron beam from above the speciman that be focus use a magnetic lens ( rather than a glass lens ) and project through the speciman onto a detector .
electron pass through the speciman , and then the detector capture the image ( figure two  .  two  two ) .
figure two  .  two  one
a transmission electron microscope ( tem ) .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world six  three figure two  .  two  two electron microscope use magnet to focus electron beam similarly to the way that light microscope use lense to focus light .
for electron to pass through the speciman in a tem , the speciman must be extremely thin (
two  zero – one  zero  zero nm thick ) .
the image be produce because of vary opacity in various part of the speciman .
this opacity can be enhance by stain the speciman with material such as heavy metal , which be electron dense .
tem require that the beam and speciman be in a vacuum and that the speciman be very thin and dehydrated .
the specific step need to prepare a specimen for observation under an em be discuss in detail in the next section .
sems form image of surface of specimen , usually from electron that be knock off of specimen by a beam of electron .
this can create highly detailed image with a three - dimensional appearance that be display on a monitor ( figure two  .  two  three ) .
typically , specimen be dry and prepare with fixative that reduce artifact , such as shriveling , that can be produce by dry , before be sputter - coat with a thin layer of metal such as gold .
whereas transmission electron microscopy require very thin section and allow one to see internal structure such as organelle and the interior of membrane , scan electron microscopy can be use to view the surface of large object ( such as a pollen grain ) as well as the surface of very small sample ( figure two  .  two  four ) .
some em can magnify an image up to two  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero ⨯ . [ one ] one .
“
jem - arm two  zero  zero f transmission electron microscope
, " jeol usa inc , http / / www . jeolusa . com / products / transmissionelectronmicroscopes% two  eight tem% two  nine  /  two  zero  zero kv / jem - arm two  zero  zero f / tabid /  six  six  three  / default . aspx# one  nine  five  zero  two  eight  - specification .
access eight  /  two  eight  / two  zero  one  five .
six  four chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  two  three
these schematic illustration compare the component of transmission electron microscope and scan electron microscope .
figure two  .  two  four ( a )
this tem image of cell in a biofilm show well - define internal structure of the cell because of vary level of opacity in the speciman .
( b )
this color - enhance sem image of the bacterium staphylococcus aureus illustrate the ability of scan electron microscopy to render three - dimensional image of the surface structure of cell .
( credit a  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

what be some advantage and disadvantage of electron microscopy , as oppose to light microscopy , for examine microbiological specimen ?

what kind of specimen be best examine use tem ?
sem ?
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world six  five use microscopy to
study biofilms a biofilm be a complex community of one or more microorganism specie , typically form as a slimy coating attach to a surface because of the production of an extrapolymeric substance ( eps ) that attach to a surface or at the interface between surface ( e . g . , between air and water ) .
in nature , biofilm be abundant and frequently occupy complex niche within ecosystem ( figure two  .  two  five ) .
in medicine , biofilm can coat medical device and exist within the body .
because - pron - possess unique characteristic , such as increase resistance against the immune system and to antimicrobial drug , biofilm be of particular interest to microbiologist and clinician alike .
because biofilm be thick , - pron - can not be observe very well use light microscopy  slice a biofilm to create a thin speciman may kill or disturb the microbial community .
confocal microscopy provide clear image of biofilm because - pron - can focus on one z - plane at a time and produce a three - dimensional image of a thick specimen .
fluorescent dye can be helpful in identify cell within the matrix .
additionally , technique such as immunofluorescence and fluorescence in situ hybridization ( fish ) , in which fluorescent probe be use to bind to dna , can be use .
electron microscopy can be use to observe biofilm , but only after dehydrate the speciman , which produce undesirable artifact and distort the speciman .
in addition to these approach , - pron - be possible to follow water current through the shape ( such as cone and mushroom ) of biofilm , use video of the movement of fluorescently coat bead ( figure two  .  two  six ) .
figure two  .  two  five
a biofilm form
when planktonic ( free - float ) bacteria of one or more specie adhere to a surface , produce slime , and form a colony .
( credit  public library of science )
micro connections six  six chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  two  six
in this image , multiple specie of bacteria grow in a biofilm on stainless steel ( stain with dapi for epifluorescence miscroscopy ) .
( credit  ricardo murga , rodney donlan )
scanning
probe microscopy a scan probe microscope do not use light or electron , but rather very sharp probe that be pass over the surface of the speciman and interact with - pron - directly .
this produce information that can be assemble into image with magnification up to one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero ⨯ .
such large magnification can be use to observe individual atom on surface .
to date , these technique have be use primarily for research rather than for diagnostic .
there be two type of scan probe microscope  the scan tunneling microscope ( stm ) and the atomic force microscope ( afm ) .
an stm use a probe that be pass just above the speciman as a constant voltage bias create the potential for an electric current between the probe and the speciman .
this current occur via quantum tunneling of electron between the probe and the speciman , and the intensity of the current be dependent upon the distance between the probe and the speciman .
the probe be move horizontally above the surface and the intensity of the current be measure .
scan tunneling microscopy can effectively map the structure of surface at a resolution at which individual atom can be detect .
similar to an stm , afm have a thin probe that be pass just above the speciman .
however , rather than measure variation in the current at a constant height above the speciman , an afm establish a constant current and measure variation in the height of the probe tip as - pron - pass over the speciman .
as the probe tip be pass over the speciman , force between the atom ( van der waals force , capillary force , chemical bonding , electrostatic force , and other ) cause - pron - to move up and down .
deflection of the probe tip be determine and measure use hooke 's law of elasticity , and this information be use to construct image of the surface of the speciman with resolution at the atomic level ( figure two  .  two  seven ) .
figure two  .  two  eight , figure two  .  two  nine , and figure two  .  three  zero summarize the microscopy technique for light microscope , electron microscope , and scan probe microscope , respectively .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world six  seven figure two  .  two  seven stm and afm allow - pron - to view image at the atomic level .
( a )
this stm image of a pure gold surface show individual atom of gold arrange in column .
( b )
this afm image show long , strand - like molecule of nanocellulose , a laboratory - create substance derive from plant fiber .
( credit a  modification of work by “ erwinrossen” / wikimedia common )

which have high magnification , a light microscope or a scan probe microscope ?

name one advantage and one limitation of scan probe microscopy .
six  eight chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  two  eight
( credit “ brightfield " 
modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “
darkfield
" 
modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “
phase contrast " 
modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “ dic
" 
modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “ fluorescence "  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit "
confocal " 
modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “
two - photon " 
modification of work by alberto diaspro , paolo bianchini , giuseppe vicidomini , mario faretta , paola ramoino , cesare usai ) chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world six  nine figure two  .  two  nine ( credit “ tem "  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “ sem " 
modification of work by american society for microbiology ) figure two  .  three  zero
seven  zero chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  .  four staining microscopic specimens learning objectives
 differentiate between simple and differential stain  describe the unique feature of commonly use stain 
explain the procedure and name clinical application for gram , endospore , acid - fast , negative capsule , and flagella stain in - pron - natural state , most of the cell and microorganism that - pron - observe under the microscope lack color and contrast .
this make - pron - difficult , if not impossible , to detect important cellular structure and - pron - distinguish characteristic without artificially treat specimen .
- pron - have already allude to certain technique involve stain and fluorescent dye , and in this section - pron - will discuss specific technique for sample preparation in great detail .
indeed , numerous method have be develop to identify specific microbe , cellular structure , dna sequence , or indicator of infection in tissue sample , under the microscope .
here , - pron - will focus on the most clinically relevant technique .
prepare specimens for light microscopy
in clinical setting , light microscope be the most commonly use microscope .
there be two basic type of preparation use to view specimen with a light microscope  wet mount and fix specimen .
the simple type of preparation be the wet mount , in which the specimen be place on the slide in a drop of liquid .
some specimen , such as a drop of urine , be already in a liquid form and can be deposit on the slide use a dropper .
solid specimen , such as a skin scraping , can be place on the slide before add a drop of liquid to prepare the wet mount .
sometimes the liquid use be simply water , but often stain be add to enhance contrast .
once the liquid have be add to the slide , a coverslip be place on top and the speciman be ready for examination under the microscope .
the second method of prepare specimen for light microscopy be fixation .
the “ fixing " of a sample refer to the process of attach cell to a slide .
fixation be often achieve either by heat ( heat fix ) or chemically treat the speciman .
in addition to attach the speciman to the slide , fixation also kill microorganism in the speciman , stop - pron - movement and metabolism while preserve the integrity of - pron - cellular component for observation .
to heat - fix a sample , a thin layer of the speciman be spread on the slide ( call a smear ) , and the slide be then briefly heat over a heat source ( figure two  .  three  one ) .
chemical fixative be often preferable to heat for tissue specimen .
chemical agent such as acetic acid , ethanol , methanol , formaldehyde ( formalin ) , and glutaraldehyde can denature protein , stop biochemical reaction , and stabilize cell structure in tissue sample ( figure two  .  three  one ) .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world seven  one figure two  .  three  one ( a )
a specimen can be heat - fix by use a slide warmer like this one .
( b )
another method for heatfixe a specimen be to hold a slide with a smear over a microincinerator .
( c )
this tissue sample be be fix in a solution of formalin ( also know as formaldehyde ) .
chemical fixation kill microorganism in the speciman , stop degradation of the tissue and preserve - pron - structure so that - pron - can be examine later under the microscope .
( credit a  modification of work by nina parker  credit b  modification of work by nina parker  credit c  modification of work by “ university of bristol” / youtube )
in addition to fixation , staining be almost always apply to color certain feature of a specimen before examine - pron - under a light microscope .
stain , or dye , contain salt make up of a positive ion and a negative ion .
depend on the type of dye , the positive or the negative ion may be the chromophore ( the colored ion )  the other , uncolored ion be call the counterion .
if the chromophore be the positively charge ion , the stain be classify as a basic dye  if the negative ion be the chromophore , the stain be consider an acidic dye .
dye be select for staining base on the chemical property of the dye and the speciman be observe , which determine how the dye will interact with the speciman .
in most case , - pron - be preferable to use a positive stain , a dye that will be absorb by the cell or organism be observe , add color to object of interest to make - pron - stand out against the background .
however , there be scenario in which - pron - be advantageous to use a negative stain , which be absorb by the background but not by the cell or organism in the speciman .
negative staining produce an outline or silhouette of the organism against a colorful background ( figure two  .  three  two ) .
figure two  .  three  two ( a )
these bacillus anthracis cell have absorb crystal violet , a basic positive stain .
( b )
this specimen of spinoloricus , a microscopic marine organism , have be stain with rose bengal , a positive acidic stain .
( c )
these b . megaterium appear to be white because - pron - have not absorb the negative red stain apply to the slide .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by roberto danovaro , antonio pusceddu , cristina gambi , iben heiner , reinhardt mobjerg kristensen  credit c  modification of work by anh - hue tu )
because cell typically have negatively charge cell wall , the positive chromophore in basic dye tend to stick to the cell wall , make - pron - positive stain .
thus , commonly use basic dye such as basic fuchsin , crystal violet , seven  two chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five malachite green , methylene blue , and safranin typically serve as positive stain .
on the other hand , the negatively charge chromophore in acidic dye be repel by negatively charge cell wall , make - pron - negative stain .
commonly use acidic dye include acid fuchsin , eosin , and rise bengal .
figure two  .  four  zero provide more detail .
some staining technique involve the application of only one dye to the sample  other require more than one dye .
in simple staining , a single dye be use to emphasize particular structure in the speciman .
a simple stain will generally make all of the organism in a sample appear to be the same color , even if the sample contain more than one type of organism .
in contrast , differential staining distinguish organism base on - pron - interaction with multiple stain .
in other word , two organism in a differentially stain sample may appear to be different color .
differential staining technique commonly use in clinical setting include gram staining , acid - fast staining , endospore staining , flagella staining , and capsule staining .
figure two  .  four  one provide more detail on these differential staining technique .

explain why - pron - be important to fix a specimen before view - pron - under a light microscope .

what type of specimen should be chemically fix as oppose to heat - fix ?

why may an acidic dye react differently with a give specimen than a basic dye ?

explain the difference between a positive stain and a negative stain .

explain the difference between simple and differential staining .
gram staining
the gram stain procedure be a differential staining procedure that involve multiple step .
- pron - be develop by danish microbiologist hans christian gram in one  eight  eight  four as an effective method to distinguish between bacteria with different type of cell wall , and even today - pron - remain one of the most frequently use staining technique .
the step of the gram stain procedure be list below and illustrate in figure two  .  three  three .
one .
first , crystal violet , a primary stain , be apply to a heat - fix smear , give all of the cell a purple color .
two .
next , gram 's iodine , a mordant , be add .
a mordant be a substance use to set or stabilize stain or dye  in this case , gram 's iodine act like a trap agent that complexe with the crystal violet , make the crystal violet – iodine complex clump and stay contain in thick layer of peptidoglycan in the cell wall .
three .
next , a decolorize agent be add , usually ethanol or an acetone / ethanol solution .
cell that have thick peptidoglycan layer in - pron - cell wall be much less affect by the decolorizing agent  - pron - generally retain the crystal violet dye and remain purple .
however , the decolorize agent more easily wash the dye out of cell with thin peptidoglycan layer , make - pron - again colorless .
four .
finally , a secondary counterstain , usually safranin , be add .
this stain the decolorized cell pink and be less noticeable in the cell that still contain the crystal violet dye .
chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world seven  three figure two  .  three  three gram - staining be a differential staining technique that use a primary stain and a secondary counterstain to distinguish between gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria .
the purple , crystal - violet stain cell be refer to as gram - positive cell , while the red , safranin - dye cell be gram - negative ( figure two  .  three  four ) .
however , there be several important consideration in interpret the result of a gram stain .
first , old bacterial cell may have damage to - pron - cell wall that cause - pron - to appear gramnegative even if the species be gram - positive .
thus , - pron - be good to use fresh bacterial culture for gram staining .
second , error such as leave on decolorizer too long can affect the result .
in some case , most cell will appear grampositive while a few appear gram - negative ( as in figure two  .  three  four ) .
this suggest damage to the individual cell or that decolorizer be leave on for too long  the cell should still be classify as gram - positive if - pron - be all the same specie rather than a mixed culture .
besides - pron - differ interaction with dye and decolorizing agent , the chemical difference between grampositive and gram - negative cell have other implication with clinical relevance .
for example , gram staining can help clinician classify bacterial pathogen in a sample into category associate with specific property .
gram - negative bacteria tend to be more resistant to certain antibiotic than gram - positive bacteria .
- pron - will discuss this and other application of gram stain in more detail in later chapter .
seven  four chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  three  four
in this speciman , the gram - positive bacterium staphylococcus aureus retain crystal violet dye even after the decolorize agent be add .
gram - negative escherichia coli , the most common gram stain quality - control bacterium , be decolorize , and be only visible after the addition of the pink counterstain safranin .
( credit  modification of work by nina parker )

explain the role of gram 's iodine in the gram stain procedure .

explain the role of alcohol in the gram stain procedure .

what color be gram - positive and gram - negative cell , respectively , after the gram stain procedure ?
part three viewing cindy 's speciman under the darkfield microscope have provide the technician with some important clue about the identity of the microbe cause - pron - infection .
however , more information be need to make a conclusive diagnosis .
the technician decide to make a gram stain of the speciman .
this technique be commonly use as an early step in identify pathogenic bacteria .
after complete the gram stain procedure , the technician view the slide under the brightfield microscope and see purple , grape - like cluster of spherical cell ( figure two  .  three  five ) .

be these bacteria gram - positive or gram - negative ?

what do this reveal about - pron - cell wall ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world seven  five figure two  .  three  five ( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
acid - fast stain
acid - fast staining be another commonly use , differential staining technique that can be an important diagnostic tool .
an acid - fast stain be able to differentiate two type of gram - positive cell  those that have waxy mycolic acid in - pron - cell wall , and those that do not .
two different method for acid - fast staining be the ziehl - neelsen technique and the kinyoun technique .
both use carbolfuchsin as the primary stain .
the waxy , acid - fast cell retain the carbolfuchsin even after a decolorize agent ( an acid - alcohol solution ) be apply .
a secondary counterstain , methylene blue , be then apply , which render non – acid - fast cell blue .
the fundamental difference between the two carbolfuchsin - base method be whether heat be use during the primary staining process .
the ziehl - neelsen method use heat to infuse the carbolfuchsin into the acid - fast cell , whereas the kinyoun method do not use heat .
both technique be important diagnostic tool because a number of specific disease be cause by acid - fast bacteria ( afb ) .
if afb be present in a tissue sample , - pron - red or pink color can be see clearly against the blue background of the surround tissue cell ( figure two  .  three  six ) .

why be acid - fast stain useful ?
use microscopy to diagnose tuberculosis mycobacterium tuberculosis , the bacterium that cause tuberculosis , can be detect in specimen base on the presence of acid - fast bacilli .
often , a smear be prepare from a sample of the patient 's sputum and then stain use the ziehl - neelsen technique ( figure two  .  three  six ) .
if acid - fast bacteria be confirm , - pron - be generally cultured to make a positive identification .
variation of this approach can be use as a first step in determine whether m . tuberculosis or other acid - fast bacteria be present , though sample from elsewhere in the body ( such as urine ) may contain other mycobacterium specie .
an alternative approach for determine the presence of m . tuberculosis be immunofluorescence .
in this technique , fluorochrome - label antibody bind to m . tuberculosis , if present .
antibody - specific fluorescent dye can be use to view the mycobacteria with a fluorescence microscope .
micro connections seven  six chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  three  six ziehl - neelsen staining have render these mycobacterium tuberculosis cell red and the surround growth indicator medium blue .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) capsule staining certain bacteria and yeast have a protective outer structure call a capsule .
since the presence of a capsule be directly relate to a microbe 's virulence ( - pron - ability to cause disease ) , the ability to determine whether cell in a sample have capsule be an important diagnostic tool .
capsule do not absorb most basic dye  therefore , a negative staining technique ( stain around the cell ) be typically use for capsule staining .
the dye stain the background but do not penetrate the capsule , which appear like halo around the border of the cell .
the specimen do not need to be heat - fix prior to negative staining .
one common negative staining technique for identify encapsulate yeast and bacteria be to add a few drop of india ink or nigrosin to a specimen .
other capsular stain can also be use to negatively stain encapsulated cell ( figure two  .  three  seven ) .
alternatively , positive and negative staining technique can be combine to visualize capsule  the positive stain color the body of the cell , and the negative stain color the background but not the capsule , leave halo around each cell .
figure two  .  three  seven ( a
) india - ink be use to stain the background around these cell of the yeast cryptococcus neoforman .
the halo surround the cell be the polysaccharide capsule .
( b ) crystal violet and copper sulfate dye can not penetrate the encapsulate bacillus cell in this negatively stain sample .
encapsulated cell appear to have a light - blue halo .
( credit a  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world seven  seven

how do negative staining help - pron - visualize capsule ?
endospore staining endospores be structure produce within certain bacterial cell that allow - pron - to survive harsh condition .
gram staining alone can not be use to visualize endospore , which appear clear when gram - stain cell be view .
endospore staining use two stain to differentiate endospore from the rest of the cell .
the schaeffer - fulton method ( the most commonly use endospore - stain technique ) use heat to push the primary stain ( malachite green ) into the endospore .
washing with water decolorize the cell , but the endospore retain the green stain .
the cell be then counterstaine pink with safranin .
the result image reveal the shape and location of endospore , if - pron - be present .
the green endospore will appear either within the pink vegetative cell or as separate from the pink cell altogether .
if no endospore be present , then only the pink vegetative cell will be visible ( figure two  .  three  eight ) .
figure two  .  three  eight
a stained preparation of bacillus subtili show endospore as green and the vegetative cell as pink .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
endospore - stain technique be important for identify bacillus and clostridium , two genera of endosporeproduce bacteria that contain clinically significant specie .
among other , b . anthracis ( which cause anthrax ) have be of particular interest because of concern that - pron - spore could be use as a bioterrorism agent .
c . difficile be a particularly important specie responsible for the typically hospital - acquire infection know as “ c . diff .
”

be endospore stain an example of positive , negative , or differential staining ?
flagella staining flagella ( singular  flagellum ) be tail - like cellular structure use for locomotion by some bacteria , archaea , and eukaryote .
because - pron - be so thin , flagella typically can not be see under a light microscope without a specialized flagella staining technique .
flagella stain thicken the flagella by first apply mordant ( generally tannic acid , but sometimes potassium alum ) , which coat the flagella  then the specimen be stain with pararosaniline ( most commonly ) or basic fuchsin ( figure two  .  three  nine ) .
seven  eight chapter two 
how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  .  three  nine
a flagella stain of bacillus cereus , a common cause of foodborne illness , reveal that the cell have numerous flagella , use for locomotion .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
though flagella staining be uncommon in clinical setting , the technique be commonly use by microbiologist , since the location and number of flagella can be useful in classify and identify bacteria in a sample .
when use this technique , - pron - be important to handle the speciman with great care  flagella be delicate structure that can easily be damage or pull off , compromise attempt to accurately locate and count the number of flagella .
figure two  .  four  zero
( credit " basic stain
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ acidic stain
" 
modification of work by roberto danovaro , antonio dell'anno , antonio pusceddu , cristina gambi , iben heiner , reinhardt mobjerg kristensen 
credit “ negative stain
" 
modification of work by anh - hue tu ) chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world seven  nine figure two  .  four  one ( credit “ gram stain " 
modification of work by nina parker  credit “ acid - fast stain "  modification of work by american society for microbiology 
credit “
endospore stain "  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit “ capsule stain "  modification of work by american society for microbiology 
credit “
flagella stain " 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
eight  zero chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five prepare specimens for electron microscopy samples to be analyze use a tem must have very thin section .
but cell be too soft to cut thinly , even with diamond knife .
to cut cell without damage , the cell must be embed in plastic resin and then dehydrate through a series of soak in ethanol solution ( five  zero % , six  zero % , seven  zero % , and so on ) .
the ethanol replace the water in the cell , and the resin dissolve in ethanol and enter the cell , where - pron - solidify .
next , thin section be cut use a specialized device call an ultramicrotome ( figure two  .  four  two ) .
finally , sample be fix to fine copper wire or carbon - fiber grid and stain - not with colored dye , but with substance like uranyl acetate or osmium tetroxide , which contain electrondense heavy metal atom .
figure two  .  four  two ( a )
an ultramicrotome use to prepare specimen for a tem .
( b )
a technician use an ultramicrotome to slice a specimen into thin section .
( credit a  modification of work by “ frost museum” / flickr  credit b  modification of work by u . s . fish and wildlife service northeast region )
when sample be prepare for view use an sem , - pron - must also be dehydrate use an ethanol series .
however , - pron - must be even dry than be necessary for a tem .
critical point dry with inert liquid carbon dioxide under pressure be use to displace the water from the speciman .
after dry , the specimen be sputter - coat with metal by knock atom off of a palladium target , with energetic particle .
sputter - coat prevent specimen from become charge by the sem 's electron beam .

why be - pron - important to dehydrate cell before examine - pron - under an electron microscope ?

name the device that be use to create thin section of specimen for electron microscopy .
use microscopy to diagnose syphilis
the causative agent of syphilis be treponema pallidum , a flexible , spiral cell ( spirochete ) that can be very thin ( < zero  .  one  five μm ) and match the refractive index of the medium , make - pron - difficult to view use brightfield microscopy .
additionally , this species have not be successfully culture in the laboratory on an artificial medium  therefore , diagnosis depend upon successful identification use microscopic technique and serology ( analysis of body fluid , often look for antibody to a pathogen ) .
since fixation and staining would kill the cell , darkfield microscopy be typically use for observe live specimen and view - pron - movement .
however , other approach can also be use .
for example , the cell can be thicken with silver particle ( in tissue section ) and observe use a light microscope .
- pron - be also possible to use fluorescence or electron microscopy to view treponema ( figure two  .  four  three ) .
micro connections chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world eight  one figure two  .  four  three ( a ) living , unstained treponema pallidum spirochete can be view under a darkfield microscope .
( b )
in this brightfield image , a modified steiner silver stain be use to visualize t . pallidum spirochete .
though the stain kill the cell , - pron - increase the contrast to make - pron - more visible .
( c ) while not use for standard diagnostic testing , t . pallidum can also be examine use scan electron microscopy .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
in clinical setting , indirect immunofluorescence be often use to identify treponema .
a primary , unstained antibody attach directly to the pathogen surface , and secondary antibody “ tag " with a fluorescent stain attach to the primary antibody .
multiple secondary antibody can attach to each primary antibody , amplify the amount of stain attach to each treponema cell , make - pron - easy to spot ( figure two  .  four  four ) .
figure two  .  four  four indirect immunofluorescence can be use to identify t . pallidum , the causative agent of syphilis , in a specimen .
preparation and staining for other microscopes samples for fluorescence and confocal microscopy be prepare similarly to sample for light microscopy , except that the dye be fluorochrome .
stain be often dilute in liquid before apply to the slide .
some dye attach to an antibody to stain specific protein on specific type of cell ( immunofluorescence )  other may attach to dna molecule in a process call fluorescence in situ hybridization ( fish ) , cause cell to be stain base on whether - pron - have a specific dna sequence .
sample preparation for two - photon microscopy be similar to fluorescence microscopy , except for the use of infrared dye .
specimen for stm need to be on a very clean and atomically smooth surface .
- pron - be often mica coat with au (  one  one  one ) .
toluene vapor be a common fixative .
eight  two chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be the main difference between prepare a sample for fluorescence microscopy versus light microscopy ?
cornell university 's case studies in microscopy
( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two cornellstud ) offer a series of clinical problem base on real - life event .
each case study walk - pron - through a clinical problem use appropriate technique in microscopy at each step .
resolution
from the result of the gram stain , the technician now know that cindy 's infection be cause by spherical , gram - positive bacteria that form grape - like cluster , which be typical of staphylococcal bacteria .
after some additional testing , the technician determine that these bacteria be the medically important specie know as staphylococcus aureus , a common culprit in wound infection .
because some strain of s . aureus be resistant to many antibiotic , skin infection may spread to other area of the body and become serious , sometimes even result in amputation or death if the correct antibiotic be not use .
after test several antibiotic , the lab be able to identify one that be effective against this particular strain of s . aureus .
cindy 's doctor quickly prescribe the medication and emphasize the importance of take the entire course of antibiotic , even if the infection appear to clear up before the last schedule dose .
this reduce the risk that any especially resistant bacteria could survive , cause a second infection or spread to another person .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
microscopy and antibiotic resistance
as the use of antibiotic have proliferate in medicine , as well as agriculture , microbe have evolve to become more resistant .
strain of bacteria such as methicillin - resistant s . aureus ( mrsa ) , which have develop a high level of resistance to many antibiotic , be an increasingly worrying problem , so much so that research be underway to develop new and more diversified antibiotic .
fluorescence microscopy can be useful in test the effectiveness of new antibiotic against resistant strain like mrsa .
in a test of one new antibiotic derive from a marine bacterium , mc two  one  - a ( bromophene ) , researcher use the fluorescent dye sytox green to stain sample of mrsa .
sytox green be often use link to learn clinical focus eye on ethics chapter two

how - pron - see the invisible world eight  three to distinguish dead cell from live cell , with fluorescence microscopy .
live cell will not absorb the dye , but cell kill by an antibiotic will absorb the dye , since the antibiotic have damage the bacterial cell membrane .
in this particular case , mrsa bacteria that have be expose to mc two  one  - a do , indeed , appear green under the fluorescence microscope , lead researcher to conclude that - pron - be an effective antibiotic against mrsa .
of course , some argue that develop new antibiotic will only lead to even more antibiotic - resistant microbe , so - call superbug that could spawn epidemic before new treatment can be develop .
for this reason , many health professional be begin to exercise more discretion in prescribe antibiotic .
whereas antibiotic be once routinely prescribe for common illness without a definite diagnosis , doctor and hospital be much more likely to conduct additional testing to determine whether an antibiotic be necessary and appropriate before prescribe .
a sick patient may reasonably object to this stingy approach to prescribing antibiotic .
to the patient who simply want to feel well as quickly as possible , the potential benefit of take an antibiotic may seem to outweigh any immediate health risk that may occur if the antibiotic be ineffective .
but at what point do the risk of widespread antibiotic use supersede the desire to use - pron - in individual case ?
summary two  .  one
the properties of light 
light wave interact with material may be reflect , absorb , or transmit , depend on the property of the material .

light wave can interact with each other ( interference ) or be distort by interaction with small object or opening ( diffraction ) .

refraction occur when light wave change speed and direction as - pron - pass from one medium to another .
difference in the refraction index of two material determine the magnitude of directional change when light pass from one to the other .

a lens be a medium with a curved surface that refract and focus light to produce an image .
 visible light be part of the electromagnetic spectrum  light wave of different frequency and wavelength be distinguish as color by the human eye .

a prism can separate the color of white light ( dispersion ) because different frequency of light have different refractive index for a give material .

fluorescent dye and phosphorescent material can effectively transform nonvisible electromagnetic radiation into visible light .

the power of a microscope can be describe in term of - pron - magnification and resolution .

resolution can be increase by shorten wavelength , increase the numerical aperture of the lens , or use stain that enhance contrast .
two  .  two peer into the invisible world  antonie van leeuwenhoek be credit with the first observation of microbe , include protist and bacteria , with simple microscope that - pron - make .

robert hooke be the first to describe what - pron - now call cell .

simple microscope have a single lens , while compound microscope have multiple lense .
two  .  three instrument of microscopy 
numerous type of microscope use various technology to generate micrograph .
most be useful for a particular type of specimen or application .

light microscopy use lense to focus light on a specimen to produce an image .
commonly use light microscope include brightfield , darkfield , phase - contrast , differential interference contrast , eight  four chapter two  how - pron - see the invisible world
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five fluorescence , confocal , and two - photon microscope .
 electron microscopy focus electron on the speciman use magnet , produce much great magnification than light microscopy .
the transmission electron microscope ( tem ) and scan electron microscope ( sem ) be two common form .

scanning probe microscopy produce image of even great magnification by measure feedback from sharp probe that interact with the specimen .
probe microscope include the scanning tunneling microscope ( stm ) and the atomic force microscope ( afm ) .
two  .  four staining microscopic specimens

samples must be properly prepare for microscopy .
this may involve staining , fixation , and / or cut thin section .

a variety of stain technique can be use with light microscopy , include gram staining , acid - fast staining , capsule staining , endospore staining , and flagella staining .

samples for tem require very thin section , whereas sample for sem require sputter - coating .

preparation for fluorescence microscopy be similar to that for light microscopy , except that fluorochrome be use .
chapter three
the cell figure three  .  one microorganism vary visually in - pron - size and shape , as can be observe microscopically  but - pron - also vary in invisible way , such as in - pron - metabolic capability .
( credit a , e , f  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by niaid  credit c  modification of work by csiro 
credit d 
modification of work by “ microscopic world” / youtube )
chapter outline three  .  one spontaneous generation three  .  two foundations of modern cell theory three  .  three unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells three  .  four unique characteristics of eukaryotic cells
introduction life take many form , from giant redwood tree tower hundred of foot in the air to the tiny know microbe , which measure only a few billionth of a meter .
human have long ponder life 's origin and debate the defining characteristic of life , but - pron - understanding of these concept have change radically since the invention of the microscope .
in the one  seven th century , observation of microscopic life lead to the development of the cell theory  the idea that the fundamental unit of life be the cell , that all organism contain at least one cell , and that cell only come from other cell .
despite share certain characteristic , cell may vary significantly .
the two main type of cell be prokaryotic cell ( lack a nucleus ) and eukaryotic cell ( contain a well - organize , membrane - bind nucleus ) .
each type of cell exhibit remarkable variety in structure , function , and metabolic activity
( figure three  .  one ) .
this chapter will focus on the historical discovery that have shape - pron - current understanding of microbe , include - pron - origin and - pron - role in human disease .
- pron - will then explore the distinguish structure find in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell .
chapter three 
the cell eight  nine three  .  one spontaneous generation learning objectives

explain the theory of spontaneous generation and why people once accept - pron - as an explanation for the existence of certain type of organism 
explain how certain individual ( van helmont , redi , needham , spallanzani , and pasteur ) try to prove or disprove spontaneous generation human have be ask for millennia  where do new life come from ?
religion , philosophy , and science have all wrestle with this question .
one of the old explanation be the theory of spontaneous generation , which can be trace back to the ancient greeks and be widely accept through the middle ages .
the theory of spontaneous generation
the greek philosopher aristotle ( three  eight  four – three  two  two bc ) be one of the early record scholar to articulate the theory of spontaneous generation , the notion that life can arise from nonlive matter .
aristotle propose that life arise from nonlive material if the material contain pneuma ( " vital heat " ) .
as evidence , - pron - note several instance of the appearance of animal from environment previously devoid of such animal , such as the seemingly sudden appearance of fish in a new puddle of water . [ one ]
this theory persist into the one  seven th century , when scientist undertake additional experimentation to support or disprove - pron - .
by this time , the proponent of the theory cite how frog simply seem to appear along the muddy bank of the nile river in egypt during the annual flooding .
other observe that mouse simply appear among grain store in barn with thatched roof .
when the roof leak and the grain mold , mouse appear .
jan baptista van helmont , a one  seven th century flemish scientist , propose that mouse could arise from rag and wheat kernel leave in an open container for three week .
in reality , such habitat provide ideal food source and shelter for mouse population to flourish .
however , one of van helmont 's contemporary , italian physician francesco redi ( one  six  two  six – one  six  nine  seven ) , perform an experiment in one  six  six  eight that be one of the first to refute the idea that maggot ( the larvae of fly ) spontaneously generate on meat leave out in the open air .
- pron - predict that prevent fly from have direct contact with the meat would also prevent the appearance of maggot .
redi leave meat in each of six container ( figure three  .  two ) .
two be open to the air , two be cover with gauze , and two be tightly seal .
- pron - hypothesis be support when maggot develop in the uncovered jar , but no maggot appear in either the gauze - cover or the tightly seal jar .
- pron - conclude that maggot could only form when fly be allow to lay egg in the meat , and that the maggot be the offspring of fly , not the product of spontaneous generation .
part one barbara be a one  nine  - year - old college student live in the dormitory .
in january , - pron - come down with a sore throat , headache , mild fever , chill , and a violent but unproductive ( i . e . , no mucus ) cough .
to treat these symptom , barbara begin take an over - the - counter cold medication , which do not seem to work .
in fact , over the next few day , while some of barbara 's symptom begin to resolve , - pron - cough and fever persist , and - pron - feel very tired and weak .

what type of respiratory disease may be responsible ?
jump to the next clinical focus box clinical focus one .
k . zwier .
“
aristotle on spontaneous generation .
"
http / / www . sju . edu / int / academics / cas / resources / gppc / pdf / karen% two  zero r . % two  zero zwier . pdf nine  zero chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  two francesco redi 's experimental setup consist of an open container , a container seal with a cork top , and a container cover in mesh that let in air but not fly .
maggot only appear on the meat in the open container .
however , maggot be also find on the gauze of the gauze - cover container .
in one  seven  four  five , john needham ( one  seven  one  three – one  seven  eight  one ) publish a report of - pron - own experiment , in which - pron - briefly boil broth infuse with plant or animal matter , hop to kill all preexisting microbes . [ two ]
- pron - then seal the flask .
after a few day , needham observe that the broth have become cloudy and a single drop contain numerous microscopic creature .
- pron - argue that the new microbe must have arise spontaneously .
in reality , however , - pron - likely do not boil the broth enough to kill all preexist microbe .
lazzaro spallanzani ( one  seven  two  nine – one  seven  nine  nine ) do not agree with needham 's conclusion , however , and perform hundred of carefully execute experiment use heat broth . [ three ]
as in needham 's experiment , broth in sealed jar and unsealed jar be infuse with plant and animal matter .
spallanzani 's result contradict the finding of needham  heated but seal flask remain clear , without any sign of spontaneous growth , unless the flask be subsequently open to the air .
this suggest that microbe be introduce into these flask from the air .
in response to spallanzani 's finding , needham argue that life originate from a " life force " that be destroy during spallanzani 's extended boiling .
any subsequent sealing of the flask then prevent new life force from enter and cause spontaneous generation ( figure three  .  three ) .
two .
e . capanna .
“
lazzaro spallanzani 
at the root of modern biology .
” journal of experimental zoology two  eight  five
no .
three ( one  nine  nine  nine  )  one  seven  eight – one  nine  six .
three .
r . mancini , m . nigro , g . ippolito .
“
lazzaro spallanzani and - pron - refutation of the theory of spontaneous generation .
"
le infezioni in medicina one  five
no .
three
( two  zero  zero  seven  )  one  nine  nine – two  zero  six .
chapter three
 the cell nine  one figure three  .  three ( a ) francesco redi , who demonstrate that maggot be the offspring of fly , not product of spontaneous generation .
( b )
john needham , who argue that microbe arise spontaneously in broth from a " life force .
"
( c ) lazzaro spallanzani , whose experiment with broth aim to disprove those of needham .

describe the theory of spontaneous generation and some of the argument use to support - pron - .

explain how the experiment of redi and spallanzani challenge the theory of spontaneous generation .
disprove spontaneous generation
the debate over spontaneous generation continue well into the one  nine th century , with scientist serve as proponent of both side .
to settle the debate , the paris academy of sciences offer a prize for resolution of the problem .
louis pasteur , a prominent french chemist who have be study microbial fermentation and the cause of wine spoilage , accept the challenge .
in one  eight  five  eight , pasteur filter air through a gun - cotton filter and , upon microscopic examination of the cotton , find - pron - full of microorganism , suggest that the exposure of a broth to air be not introduce a " life force " to the broth but rather airborne microorganism .
later , pasteur make a series of flask with long , twisted neck ( " swan - neck " flask ) , in which - pron - boil broth to sterilize - pron - ( figure three  .  four ) .
- pron - design allow air inside the flask to be exchange with air from the outside , but prevent the introduction of any airborne microorganism , which would get catch in the twist and bend of the flask ' neck .
if a life force besides the airborne microorganism be responsible for microbial growth within the sterilize flask , - pron - would have access to the broth , whereas the microorganism would not .
- pron - correctly predict that sterilize broth in - pron - swan - neck flask would remain sterile as long as the swan neck remain intact .
however , should the neck be break , microorganism would be introduce , contaminate the flask and allow microbial growth within the broth .
pasteur 's set of experiment irrefutably disprove the theory of spontaneous generation and earn - pron - the prestigious alhumbert prize from the paris academy of sciences in one  eight  six  two .
in a subsequent lecture in one  eight  six  four , pasteur articulate "
omne vivum ex vivo
" ( “ life only come from life " ) .
in this lecture , pasteur recount - pron - famous swanneck flask experiment , state that " … life be a germ and a germ be life .
never will the doctrine of spontaneous generation recover from the mortal blow of this simple experiment . ”[ four ]
to pasteur 's credit , - pron - never have .
four .
r . vallery - radot .
the life of pasteur , tran .
r . l . devonshire .
new york 
mcclure , phillips and co , one  nine  zero  two , one   one  four  two .
nine  two chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  four ( a ) french scientist louis pasteur , who definitively refute the long - dispute theory of spontaneous generation .
( b )
the unique swan - neck feature of the flask use in pasteur 's experiment allow air to enter the flask but prevent the entry of bacterial and fungal spore .
( c )
pasteur 's experiment consist of two part .
in the first part , the broth in the flask be boil to sterilize - pron - .
when this broth be cool , - pron - remain free of contamination .
in the second part of the experiment , the flask be boil and then the neck be break off .
the broth in this flask become contaminated .
( credit b  modification of work by
“ wellcome images” / wikimedia commons )

how do pasteur 's experimental design allow air , but not microbe , to enter , and why be this important ?

what be the control group in pasteur 's experiment and what do - pron - show ?
chapter three
 the cell nine  three three  .  two foundations of modern cell theory learning objectives

explain the key point of cell theory and the individual contribution of hooke , schleiden , schwann , remak , and virchow 
explain the key point of endosymbiotic theory and cite the evidence that support this concept 
explain the contribution of semmelweis , snow , pasteur , lister , and koch to the development of germ theory while some scientist be argue over the theory of spontaneous generation , other scientist be make discovery lead to a well understanding of what - pron - now call the cell theory .
modern cell theory have two basic tenet 
 all cell only come from other cell ( the principle of biogenesis ) .

cell be the fundamental unit of organism .
today , these tenet be fundamental to - pron - understanding of life on earth .
however , modern cell theory grow out of the collective work of many scientist .
the origins of cell theory
the english scientist robert hooke first use the term “ cell " in one  six  six  five to describe the small chamber within cork that - pron - observe under a microscope of - pron - own design .
to hooke , thin section of cork resemble “ honey - comb , " or “ small boxes or bladders of air .
"
- pron - note that each “ cavern , bubble , or cell " be distinct from the other ( figure three  .  five ) .
at the time , hooke be not aware that the cork cell be long dead and , therefore , lack the internal structure find within live cell .
figure three  .  five robert hooke ( one  six  three  five – one  seven  zero  three ) be the first to describe cell base upon - pron - microscopic observation of cork .
this illustration be publish in - pron - work micrographia .
despite hooke 's early description of cell , - pron - significance as the fundamental unit of life be not yet recognize .
nearly two  zero  zero year later , in one  eight  three  eight , matthias schleiden ( one  eight  zero  four – one  eight  eight  one ) , a german botanist who make extensive microscopic observation of plant tissue , describe - pron - as be compose of cell .
visualize plant cell be relatively easy because plant cell be clearly separate by - pron - thick cell wall .
schleiden believe that cell form through crystallization , rather than cell division .
theodor schwann ( one  eight  one  zero – one  eight  eight  two ) , a noted german physiologist , make similar microscopic observation of animal tissue .
in one  eight  three  nine , after a conversation with schleiden , schwann realize that similarity exist between plant and nine  four chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five animal tissue .
this lay the foundation for the idea that cell be the fundamental component of plant and animal .
in the one  eight  five  zero s , two polish scientist live in germany push this idea further , culminate in what - pron - recognize today as the modern cell theory .
in one  eight  five  two , robert remak ( one  eight  one  five – one  eight  six  five ) , a prominent neurologist and embryologist , publish convincing evidence that cell be derive from other cell as a result of cell division .
however , this idea be question by many in the scientific community .
three year later , rudolf virchow ( one  eight  two  one – one  nine  zero  two ) , a wellrespected pathologist , publish an editorial essay entitle “ cellular pathology , " which popularize the concept of cell theory use the latin phrase omni cellula a cellula ( “ all cell arise from cell " ) , which be essentially the second tenet of modern cell theory . [ five ]
give the similarity of virchow 's work to remak 's , there be some controversy as to which scientist should receive credit for articulate cell theory .
see the follow eye on ethics feature for more about this controversy .
science and plagiarism rudolf virchow , a prominent , polish - bear , german scientist , be often remember as the “ father of pathology .
"
well known for innovative approach , - pron - be one of the first to determine the cause of various disease by examine - pron - effect on tissue and organ .
- pron - be also among the first to use animal in - pron - research and , as a result of - pron - work , - pron - be the first to name numerous disease and create many other medical term .
over the course of - pron - career , - pron - publish more than two  ,  zero  zero  zero paper and head various important medical facility , include the charité – universitätsmedizin berlin , a prominent berlin hospital and medical school .
but - pron - be , perhaps , best remember for - pron - one  eight  five  five editorial essay title “ cellular pathology , " publish in
archiv für pathologische anatomie und physiologie , a journal that virchow - pron - cofounde and still exist today .
despite - pron - significant scientific legacy , there be some controversy regard this essay , in which virchow propose the central tenet of modern cell theory - that all cell arise from other cell .
robert remak , a former colleague who work in the same laboratory as virchow at the university of berlin , have publish the same idea three year before .
though - pron - appear virchow be familiar with remak 's work , - pron - neglect to credit remak 's idea in - pron - essay .
when remak write a letter to virchow point out similarity between virchow 's idea and - pron - own , virchow be dismissive .
in one  eight  five  eight , in the preface to one of - pron - book , virchow write that - pron - one  eight  five  five publication be just an editorial piece , not a scientific paper , and thus there be no need to cite remak 's work .
by today 's standard , virchow 's editorial piece would certainly be consider an act of plagiarism , since - pron - present remak 's idea as - pron - own .
however , in the one  nine th century , standard for academic integrity be much less clear .
virchow 's strong reputation , couple with the fact that remak be a jew in a somewhat anti - semitic political climate , shield - pron - from any significant repercussion .
today , the process of peer review and the ease of access to the scientific literature help discourage plagiarism .
although scientist be still motivate to publish original idea that advance scientific knowledge , those who would consider plagiarize be well aware of the serious consequence .
in academia , plagiarism represent the theft of both individual thought and research - an offense that can destroy reputation and end careers . [ six ] [ seven ]
[ eight ]
[ nine ] eye on ethics five .
m . schultz .
“
rudolph virchow .
"
emerge infectious diseases one  four
no .
nine ( two  zero  zero  eight  )  one  four  eight  zero – one  four  eight  one .
six .
b . kisch .
“
forget leaders in modern medicine , valentin , gouby , remak , auerbach .
"
transaction of the american philosophical society four  four ( one  nine  five  four  )  one  three  nine – three  one  seven .
seven . h . harris .
the birth of the cell .
new haven , ct  yale university press , two  zero  zero  zero   one  three  three .
eight .
c . webster ( ed . ) .
biology , medicine and society one  eight  four  zero - one  nine  four  zero .
cambridge , uk  cambridge university press , one  nine  eight  one   one  one  eight – one  one  nine .
nine .
c . zuchora - walske .
key discoveries in life science .
minneapolis , mn 
lerner publishing , two  zero  one  five   one  two – one  three .
chapter three
 the cell nine  five figure three  .  six ( a )
rudolf virchow ( one  eight  two  one – one  nine  zero  two ) popularize the cell theory in an one  eight  five  five essay entitle “ cellular pathology .
”
( b )
the idea that all cell originate from other cell be first publish in one  eight  five  two by - pron - contemporary and former colleague robert remak ( one  eight  one  five – one  eight  six  five ) .

what be the key point of the cell theory ?

what contribution do rudolf virchow and robert remak make to the development of the cell theory ?
endosymbiotic theory
as scientist be make progress toward understand the role of cell in plant and animal tissue , other be examine the structure within the cell - pron - .
in one  eight  three  one , scottish botanist robert brown ( one  seven  seven  three – one  eight  five  eight ) be the first to describe observation of nucleus , which - pron - observe in plant cell .
then , in the early one  eight  eight  zero s , german botanist andreas schimper ( one  eight  five  six – one  nine  zero  one ) be the first to describe the chloroplast of plant cell , identify - pron - role in starch formation during photosynthesis and note that - pron - divide independent of the nucleus .
base upon the chloroplast ' ability to reproduce independently , russian botanist konstantin mereschkowski ( one  eight  five  five – one  nine  two  one ) suggest in one  nine  zero  five that chloroplast may have originate from ancestral photosynthetic bacteria live symbiotically inside a eukaryotic cell .
- pron - propose a similar origin for the nucleus of plant cell .
this be the first articulation of the endosymbiotic hypothesis , and would explain how eukaryotic cell evolve from ancestral bacteria .
mereschkowski 's endosymbiotic hypothesis be further by american anatomist ivan wallin ( one  eight  eight  three – one  nine  six  nine ) , who begin to experimentally examine the similarity between mitochondria , chloroplast , and bacteria - in other word , to put the endosymbiotic hypothesis to the test use objective investigation .
wallin publish a series of paper in the one  nine  two  zero support the endosymbiotic hypothesis , include a one  nine  two  six publication co - author with mereschkowski .
wallin claim - pron - could culture mitochondria outside of - pron - eukaryotic host cell .
many scientist dismiss - pron - culture of mitochondria as result from bacterial contamination .
modern genome sequence work support the dissent scientist by show that much of the genome of mitochondria have be transfer to the host cell 's nucleus , prevent the mitochondria from be able to live on - pron - own . [ one  zero ]
[ one  one ] one  zero .
t . embley , w . martin .
“
eukaryotic evolution , changes , and challenges .
"
nature vol .
four  four  zero ( two  zero  zero  six  )  six  two  three – six  three  zero .
nine  six chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five wallin 's idea regard the endosymbiotic hypothesis be largely ignore for the next five  zero year because scientist be unaware that these organelle contain - pron - own dna .
however , with the discovery of mitochondrial and chloroplast dna in the one  nine  six  zero , the endosymbiotic hypothesis be resurrect .
lynn margulis ( one  nine  three  eight – two  zero  one  one ) , an american geneticist , publish - pron - idea regard the endosymbiotic hypothesis of the origin of mitochondria and chloroplast in one  nine  six  seven  . [ one  two ]
in the decade lead up to - pron - publication , advance in microscopy have allow scientist to differentiate prokaryotic cell from eukaryotic cell .
in - pron - publication , margulis review the literature and argue that the eukaryotic organelle such as mitochondria and chloroplast be of prokaryotic origin .
- pron - present a grow body of microscopic , genetic , molecular biology , fossil , and geological datum to support - pron - claim .
again , this hypothesis be not initially popular , but mount genetic evidence due to the advent of dna sequencing support the endosymbiotic theory , which be now define as the theory that mitochondria and chloroplast arise as a result of prokaryotic cell establish a symbiotic relationship within a eukaryotic host ( figure three  .  seven ) .
with margulis ' initial endosymbiotic theory gain wide acceptance , - pron - expand on the theory in - pron - one  nine  eight  one book symbiosis in cell evolution .
in - pron - , - pron - explain how endosymbiosis be a major driving factor in the evolution of organism .
more recent genetic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis show that mitochondrial dna and chloroplast dna be highly related to - pron - bacterial counterpart , both in dna sequence and chromosome structure .
however , mitochondrial dna and chloroplast dna be reduce compare with nuclear dna because many of the gene have move from the organelle into the host cell 's nucleus .
additionally , mitochondrial and chloroplast ribosome be structurally similar to bacterial ribosome , rather than to the eukaryotic ribosome of - pron - host .
last , the binary fission of these organelle strongly resemble the binary fission of bacteria , as compare with mitosis perform by eukaryotic cell .
since margulis ' original proposal , scientist have observe several example of bacterial endosymbiont in modern - day eukaryotic cell .
example include the endosymbiotic bacteria find within the gut of certain insect , such as cockroaches , [ one  three ] and photosynthetic bacteria - like organelle find in protists . [ one  four ] one  one .
o . g . berg , c . g . kurland .
“
why mitochondrial gene be most often find in nuclei .
"
molecular biology and evolution one  seven
no .
six ( two  zero  zero  zero  )  nine  five  one – nine  six  one . one  two .
l . sagan .
"
on the origin of mitosing cells .
" journal of theoretical biology one  four
no .
three ( one  nine  six  seven  )  two  two  five – two  seven  four . one  three .
a . e . douglas .
“
the microbial dimension in insect nutritional ecology .
"
functional ecology two  three ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  three  eight – four  seven . one  four .
j . m . jaynes , l . p . vernon .
“
the cyanelle of cyanophora paradoxa 
almost a cyanobacterial chloroplast .
”
trends in biochemical sciences seven
no .
one
( one  nine  eight  two  )  two  two – two  four .
chapter three
 the cell nine  seven figure three  .  seven
accord to the endosymbiotic theory , mitochondria and chloroplast be each derive from the uptake of bacteria .
these bacteria establish a symbiotic relationship with - pron - host cell that eventually lead to the bacteria evolve into mitochondria and chloroplast .

what do the modern endosymbiotic theory state ?

what evidence support the endosymbiotic theory ?
the germ theory of disease
prior to the discovery of microbe during the one  seven th century , other theory circulate about the origin of disease .
for example , the ancient greeks propose the miasma theory , which hold that disease originate from particle emanate from decompose matter , such as that in sewage or cesspit .
such particle infect human in close proximity to the rot material .
disease include the black death , which ravage europe 's population during the middle ages , be think to have originate in this way .
in one  five  four  six , italian physician girolamo fracastoro propose , in - pron - essay de contagione et contagiosis morbis , that seed - like spore may be transfer between individual through direct contact , exposure to contaminate clothing , or through the air .
- pron - now recognize fracastoro as an early proponent of the germ theory of disease , which state that disease may result from microbial infection .
however , in the one  six th century , fracastoro 's idea be not widely accept and would be largely forget until the one  nine th century .
in one  eight  four  seven , hungarian obstetrician ignaz semmelweis ( figure three  .  eight ) observe that mother who give birth in hospital ward staff by physician and medical student be more likely to suffer and die from puerperal fever after childbirth ( one  zero %– two  zero % mortality rate ) than be mother in ward staff by midwife ( one % mortality rate ) .
semmelwei observe medical student perform autopsy and then subsequently carry out vaginal examination on live patient without wash - pron - hand in between .
- pron - suspect that the student carry disease nine  eight chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five from the autopsy to the patient - pron - examine .
- pron - suspicion be support by the untimely death of a friend , a physician who contract a fatal wound infection after a postmortem examination of a woman who have die of a puerperal infection .
the dead physician 's wound have be cause by a scalpel use during the examination , and - pron - subsequent illness and death closely parallel that of the dead patient .
although semmelweis do not know the true cause of puerperal fever , - pron - propose that physician be somehow transfer the causative agent to - pron - patient .
- pron - suggest that the number of puerperal fever case could be reduce if physician and medical student simply wash - pron - hand with chlorinated lime water before and after examine every patient .
when this practice be implement , the maternal mortality rate in mother care for by physician drop to the same one % mortality rate observe among mother care for by midwife .
this demonstrate that handwash be a very effective method for prevent disease transmission .
despite this great success , many discount semmelweis 's work at the time , and physician be slow to adopt the simple procedure of handwash to prevent infection in - pron - patient because - pron - contradict established norm for that time period .
figure three  .  eight ignaz semmelweis ( one  eight  one  eight – one  eight  six  five ) be a proponent of the importance of handwash to prevent transfer of disease between patient by physician .
around the same time semmelweis be promote handwash , in one  eight  four  eight , british physician john snow conduct study to track the source of cholera outbreak in london .
by trace the outbreak to two specific water source , both of which be contaminate by sewage , snow ultimately demonstrate that cholera bacteria be transmit via drinking water .
snow 's work be influential in that - pron - represent the first know epidemiological study , and - pron - result in the first know public health response to an epidemic .
the work of both semmelweis and snow clearly refute the prevail miasma theory of the day , show that disease be not only transmit through the air but also through contaminate item .
although the work of semmelweis and snow successfully show the role of sanitation in prevent infectious disease , the cause of disease be not fully understand .
the subsequent work of louis pasteur , robert koch , and joseph lister would further substantiate the germ theory of disease .
while study the cause of beer and wine spoilage in one  eight  five  six , pasteur discover property of fermentation by microorganism .
- pron - have demonstrate with - pron - swan - neck flask experiment ( figure three  .  four ) that airborne microbe , not spontaneous generation , be the cause of food spoilage , and - pron - suggest that if microbe be responsible for food spoilage and fermentation , - pron - could also be responsible for cause infection .
this be the foundation for the germ theory of disease .
meanwhile , british surgeon joseph lister ( figure three  .  nine ) be try to determine the cause of postsurgical infection .
many physician do not give credence to the idea that microbe on - pron - hand , on - pron - clothe , or in the air could infect patient ' surgical wound , despite the fact that five  zero % of surgical patient , on average , be die of postsurgical infections . [ one  five ]
lister , however , be familiar with the work of semmelweis and pasteur  therefore , - pron - insist on one  five .
alexander , j . wesley .
"
the contributions of infection control to a century of progress " annals of surgery
two  zero  one   four  two  three - four  two  eight , one  nine  eight  five .
chapter three
 the cell nine  nine handwashing and extreme cleanliness during surgery .
in one  eight  six  seven , to further decrease the incidence of postsurgical wound infection , lister begin use carbolic acid ( phenol ) spray disinfectant / antiseptic during surgery .
- pron - extremely successful effort to reduce postsurgical infection cause - pron - technique to become a standard medical practice .
a few year later , robert koch ( figure three  .  nine ) propose a series of postulate ( koch 's postulate ) base on the idea that the cause of a specific disease could be attribute to a specific microbe .
use these postulate , koch and - pron - colleague be able to definitively identify the causative pathogen of specific disease , include anthrax , tuberculosis , and cholera .
koch 's “ one microbe
, one disease " concept be the culmination of the one  nine th century 's paradigm shift away from miasma theory and toward the germ theory of disease .
koch 's postulate be discuss more thoroughly in how pathogens cause disease .
figure three  .  nine ( a )
joseph lister develop procedure for the proper care of surgical wound and the sterilization of surgical equipment .
( b ) robert koch establish a protocol to determine the cause of infectious disease .
both scientist contribute significantly to the acceptance of the germ theory of disease .

compare and contrast the miasma theory of disease with the germ theory of disease .

how do joseph lister 's work contribute to the debate between the miasma theory and germ theory and how do this increase the success of medical procedure ?
part two
after suffer a fever , congestion , cough , and increase ache and pain for several day , barbara suspect that - pron - have a case of the flu .
- pron - decide to visit the health center at - pron - university .
the pa tell barbara that - pron - symptom could be due to a range of disease , such as influenza , bronchitis , pneumonia , or tuberculosis .
during - pron - physical examination , the pa note that barbara 's heart rate be slightly elevated .
use a pulse oximeter , a small device that clip on - pron - finger , - pron - find that barbara have hypoxemia - a low - than - normal level of oxygen in the blood .
use a stethoscope , the pa listen for abnormal sound make by barbara 's heart , lung , and digestive system .
as barbara breathe , the pa hear a crackle sound and note a slight shortness of breath .
- pron - collect a sputum sample , note the greenish color of the mucus , and order a chest radiograph , which show a " shadow " in the left lung .
all of these sign be suggestive of pneumonia , a condition in which clinical focus one  zero  zero chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the lung fill with mucus ( figure three  .  one  zero ) .
figure three  .  one  zero
this be a chest radiograph typical of pneumonia .
because x - ray image be negative image , a " shadow " be see as a white area within the lung that should otherwise be black .
in this case , the left lung show a shadow as a result of pocket in the lung that have become fill with fluid .
( credit leave  modification of work by “ christaras a” / wikimedia commons )

what kind of infectious agent be know to cause pneumonia ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
chapter three
 the cell one  zero  one figure three  .  one  one ( credit “ swan - neck flask "  modification of work by wellcome images ) three  .  three unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells
learning objectives

explain the distinguish characteristic of prokaryotic cell  describe common cell morphology and cellular arrangement typical of prokaryotic cell and explain how cell maintain - pron - morphology

describe internal and external structure of prokaryotic cell in term of - pron - physical structure , chemical structure , and function  compare the distinguish characteristic of bacterial and archaeal cell cell theory state that the cell be the fundamental unit of life .
however , cell vary significantly in size , shape , structure , and function .
at the simple level of construction , all cell possess a few fundamental component .
these include cytoplasm ( a gel - like substance compose of water and dissolve chemical need for growth ) , which be contain within a plasma membrane ( also call a cell membrane or cytoplasmic membrane )  one or more chromosome , which contain the genetic blueprint of the cell  and ribosome , organelle use for the production of protein .
beyond these basic component , cell can vary greatly between organism , and even within the same multicellular organism .
the two large category of cell - prokaryotic cell and eukaryotic cell - be define by major difference in several cell structure .
prokaryotic cell lack a nucleus surround by a complex nuclear membrane one  zero  two chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and generally have a single , circular chromosome locate in a nucleoid .
eukaryotic cell have a nucleus surround by a complex nuclear membrane that contain multiple , rod - shape chromosomes . [ one  six ] all plant cell and animal cell be eukaryotic .
some microorganism be compose of prokaryotic cell , whereas other be compose of eukaryotic cell .
prokaryotic microorganism be classify within the domain archaea and bacteria , whereas eukaryotic organism be classify within the domain eukarya .
the structure inside a cell be analogous to the organ inside a human body , with unique structure suit to specific function .
some of the structure find in prokaryotic cell be similar to those find in some eukaryotic cell  other be unique to prokaryote .
although there be some exception , eukaryotic cell tend to be large than prokaryotic cell .
the comparatively large size of eukaryotic cell dictate the need to compartmentalize various chemical process within different area of the cell , use complex membrane - bind organelle .
in contrast , prokaryotic cell generally lack membrane - bind organelle  however , - pron - often contain inclusion that compartmentalize - pron - cytoplasm .
figure three  .  one  two illustrate structure typically associate with prokaryotic cell .
these structure be describe in more detail in the next section .
figure three  .  one  two
a typical prokaryotic cell contain a cell membrane , chromosomal dna that be concentrate in a nucleoid , ribosome , and a cell wall .
some prokaryotic cell may also possess flagella , pili , fimbriae , and capsule .
common cell morphologies and arrangements individual cell of a particular prokaryotic organism be typically similar in shape , or cell morphology .
although thousand of prokaryotic organism have be identify , only a handful of cell morphology be commonly see microscopically .
figure three  .  one  three name and illustrate cell morphology commonly find in prokaryotic cell .
in addition to cellular shape , prokaryotic cell of the same specie may group together in certain distinctive arrangement depend on the plane of cell division .
some common arrangement be show in figure three  .  one  four .
one  six .
y . - h . m . chan , w . f . marshall .
“
scale properties of cell and organelle size .
"
organogenesis six
no . two
( two  zero  one  zero  )  eight  eight – nine  six .
chapter three
 the cell one  zero  three figure three  .  one  three
( credit “ coccus " micrograph 
modification of work by janice haney carr , centers for disease control and prevention 
credit “ coccobacillus " micrograph 
modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention  credit “
spirochete " micrograph 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) one  zero  four chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  one  four
in most prokaryotic cell , morphology be maintain by the cell wall in combination with cytoskeletal element .
the cell wall be a structure find in most prokaryote and some eukaryote  - pron - envelop the cell membrane , protect the cell from change in osmotic pressure ( figure three  .  one  five ) .
osmotic pressure occur because of difference in the concentration of solute on oppose side of a semipermeable membrane .
water be able to pass through a semipermeable membrane , but solute ( dissolve molecule like salt , sugar , and other compound ) can not .
when the concentration of solute be great on one side of the membrane , water diffuse across the membrane from the side with the low concentration ( more water ) to the side with the high concentration ( less water ) until the concentration on both side become equal .
this diffusion of water be call osmosis , and - pron - can cause extreme osmotic pressure on a cell when - pron - external environment change .
the external environment of a cell can be describe as an isotonic , hypertonic , or hypotonic medium .
in an isotonic medium , the solute concentration inside and outside the cell be approximately equal , so there be no net movement of water across the cell membrane .
in a hypertonic medium , the solute concentration outside the cell exceed that inside the cell , so water diffuse out of the cell and into the external medium .
in a hypotonic medium , the solute concentration inside the cell exceed that outside of the cell , so water will move by osmosis into the cell .
this cause the cell to swell and potentially lyse , or burst .
the degree to which a particular cell be able to withstand change in osmotic pressure be call tonicity .
cell that have a cell wall be better able to withstand subtle change in osmotic pressure and maintain - pron - shape .
in hypertonic environment , cell that lack a cell wall can become dehydrated , cause crenation , or shrivel of the cell  the plasma membrane contract and appear scallop or notch ( figure three  .  one  five ) .
by contrast , cell that possess a cell wall undergo plasmolysis rather than crenation .
in plasmolysis , the plasma membrane contract and detache from the cell wall , and there be a decrease in interior volume , but the cell wall remain intact , thus allow the cell to maintain some shape and integrity for a period of time ( figure three  .  one  six ) .
likewise , cell that lack a cell wall be more prone to lysis in hypotonic environment .
the presence of a cell wall allow the cell to maintain - pron - shape and integrity chapter three  the cell one  zero  five for a long time before lyse ( figure three  .  one  six ) .
figure three  .  one  five
in cell that lack a cell wall , change in osmotic pressure can lead to crenation in hypertonic environment or cell lysis in hypotonic environment .
figure three  .  one  six
in prokaryotic cell , the cell wall provide some protection against change in osmotic pressure , allow - pron - to maintain - pron - shape longer .
the cell membrane be typically attach to the cell wall in an isotonic medium ( leave ) .
in a hypertonic medium , the cell membrane detache from the cell wall and contract ( plasmolysis ) as water leave the cell .
in a hypotonic medium ( right ) , the cell wall prevent the cell membrane from expand to the point of bursting , although lysis will eventually occur if too much water be absorb .
one  zero  six chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 explain the difference between cell morphology and arrangement .

what advantage do cell wall provide prokaryotic cell ?
the nucleoid all cellular life have a dna genome organize into one or more chromosome .
prokaryotic chromosome be typically circular , haploid ( unpaired ) , and not bind by a complex nuclear membrane .
prokaryotic dna and dna - associate protein be concentrate within the nucleoid region of the cell ( figure three  .  one  seven ) .
in general , prokaryotic dna interact with nucleoid - associate protein ( naps ) that assist in the organization and packaging of the chromosome .
in bacteria , nap function similar to histone , which be the dna - organize protein find in eukaryotic cell .
in archaea , the nucleoid be organize by either nap or histone - like dna organizing protein .
figure three  .  one  seven
the nucleoid region ( the area enclose by the green dash line ) be a condensed area of dna find within prokaryotic cell .
because of the density of the area , - pron - do not readily stain and appear light in color when view with a transmission electron microscope .
plasmids prokaryotic cell may also contain extrachromosomal dna , or dna that be not part of the chromosome .
this extrachromosomal dna be find in plasmid , which be small , circular , double - strand dna molecule .
cell that have plasmid often have hundred of - pron - within a single cell .
plasmid be more commonly find in bacteria  however , plasmid have be find in archaea and eukaryotic organism .
plasmid often carry gene that confer advantageous trait such as antibiotic resistance  thus , - pron - be important to the survival of the organism .
- pron - will discuss plasmid in more detail in mechanisms of microbial genetics .
ribosomes
all cellular life synthesize protein , and organism in all three domain of life possess ribosome , structure responsible for protein synthesis .
however , ribosome in each of the three domain be structurally different .
ribosome , - pron - , be construct from protein , along with ribosomal rna ( rrna ) .
prokaryotic ribosome be find in the cytoplasm .
- pron - be call seven  zero s ribosome because - pron - have a size of seven  zero s ( figure three  .  one  eight ) , whereas eukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosome have a size of eight  zero s . ( the s stand for svedberg unit , a measure of sedimentation in an ultracentrifuge , which be base on size , shape , and surface quality of the structure be analyze ) .
although - pron - be the same size , bacterial and archaeal ribosome have different protein and rrna molecule , and the archaeal version be more similar to - pron - eukaryotic counterpart than to those find in bacteria .
chapter three  the cell one  zero  seven figure three  .  one  eight prokaryotic ribosome ( seven  zero s ) be compose of two subunit  the three  zero s ( small subunit ) and the five  zero s ( large subunit ) , each of which be compose of protein and rrna component .
inclusion
as single - celle organism live in unstable environment , some prokaryotic cell have the ability to store excess nutrient within cytoplasmic structure call inclusion .
store nutrient in a polymerize form be advantageous because - pron - reduce the buildup of osmotic pressure that occur as a cell accumulate solute .
various type of inclusion store glycogen and starch , which contain carbon that cell can access for energy .
volutin granule , also call metachromatic granule because of - pron - staining characteristic , be inclusion that store polymerize inorganic phosphate that can be use in metabolism and assist in the formation of biofilm .
microbe know to contain volutin granule include the archaea methanosarcina , the bacterium corynebacterium diphtheriae , and the unicellular eukaryotic alga chlamydomonas .
sulfur granule , another type of inclusion , be find in sulfur bacteria of the genus thiobacillus  these granule store elemental sulfur , which the bacteria use for metabolism .
occasionally , certain type of inclusion be surround by a phospholipid monolayer embed with protein .
polyhydroxybutyrate ( phb ) , which can be produce by specie of bacillus and pseudomonas , be an example of an inclusion that display this type of monolayer structure .
industrially , phb have also be use as a source of biodegradable polymer for bioplastic .
several different type of inclusion be show in figure three  .  one  nine .
one  zero  eight chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  one  nine prokaryotic cell may have various type of inclusion .
( a )
a transmission electron micrograph of polyhydroxybutryrate lipid droplet .
( b )
a light micrograph of volutin granule .
( c ) a phase - contrast micrograph of sulfur granule .
( d )
a transmission electron micrograph of gas vacuole .
( e )
a transmission electron micrograph of magnetosome .
( credit b , c , d  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
some prokaryotic cell have other type of inclusion that serve purpose other than nutrient storage .
for example , some prokaryotic cell produce gas vacuole , accumulation of small , protein - line vesicle of gas .
these gas vacuole allow the prokaryotic cell that synthesize - pron - to alter - pron - buoyancy so that - pron - can adjust - pron - location in the water column .
magnetotactic bacteria , such as magnetospirillum magnetotacticum , contain magnetosome , which be inclusion of magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide surround by a lipid layer .
these allow cell to align along a magnetic field , aid - pron - movement ( figure three  .  one  nine ) .
cyanobacteria such as anabaena cylindrica and bacteria such as halothiobacillus neapolitanus produce carboxysome inclusion .
carboxysome be compose of outer shell of thousand of protein subunit .
- pron - interior be fill with ribulose -  one  ,  five  - bisphosphate carboxylase / oxygenase ( rubisco ) and carbonic anhydrase .
both of these compound be use for carbon metabolism .
some prokaryotic cell also possess carboxysome that sequester functionally related enzyme in one location .
these structure be consider proto - organelle because - pron - compartmentalize important compound or chemical reaction , much like many eukaryotic organelle .
endospore bacterial cell be generally observe as vegetative cell , but some genera of bacteria have the ability to form endospore , structure that essentially protect the bacterial genome in a dormant state when environmental condition be unfavorable .
endospore ( not to be confuse with the reproductive spore form by fungi ) allow some bacterial cell to survive long period without food or water , as well as exposure to chemical , extreme temperature , and even radiation .
table three  .  one compare the characteristic of vegetative cell and endospore .
chapter three
 the cell one  zero  nine characteristics of vegetative cells versus endospores vegetative cell endospore
sensitive to extreme temperature and radiation resistant to extreme temperature and radiation gram - positive
do not absorb gram stain , only special endospore stain ( see staining microscopic specimens )
normal water content and enzymatic activity dehydrated  no metabolic activity capable of active growth and metabolism dormant  no growth or metabolic activity table three  .  one
the process by which vegetative cell transform into endospore be call sporulation , and - pron - generally begin when nutrient become depleted or environmental condition become otherwise unfavorable ( figure three  .  two  zero ) .
the process begin with the formation of a septum in the vegetative bacterial cell .
the septum divide the cell asymmetrically , separate a dna forespore from the mother cell .
the forespore , which will form the core of the endospore , be essentially a copy of the cell 's chromosome , and be separate from the mother cell by a second membrane .
a cortex gradually form around the forespore by lay down layer of calcium and dipicolinic acid between membrane .
a protein spore coat then form around the cortex while the dna of the mother cell disintegrate .
further maturation of the endospore occur with the formation of an outermost exosporium .
the endospore be release upon disintegration of the mother cell , complete sporulation .
one  one  zero chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  two  zero
( a ) sporulation begin follow asymmetric cell division .
the forespore become surround by a double layer of membrane , a cortex , and a protein spore coat , before be release as a mature endospore upon disintegration of the mother cell .
( b )
an electron micrograph of a carboxydothermus hydrogenoforman endospore .
( c )
these bacillus spp .
cell be undergo sporulation .
the endospore have be visualize use malachite green spore stain .
( credit b  modification of work by jonathan eisen )
endospore of certain specie have be show to persist in a dormant state for extended period of time , up to thousand of years . [ one  seven ]
however , when live condition improve , endospore undergo germination , reentere a vegetative state .
after germination , the cell become metabolically active again and be able to carry out all of - pron - normal function , include growth and cell division .
not all bacteria have the ability to form endospore  however , there be a number of clinically significant endosporeforming gram - positive bacteria of the genera bacillus and clostridium .
these include b . anthracis , the causative agent of anthrax , which produce endospore capable of survive for many decades[ one  eight ]  c . tetani ( cause tetanus )  c . difficile ( cause pseudomembranous colitis )  c . perfringen ( cause gas gangrene )  and c . botulinum ( cause botulism ) .
pathogen such as these be particularly difficult to combat because - pron - endospore be so hard to kill .
special sterilization method for endospore - form bacteria be discuss in control of microbial growth .

what be an inclusion ?

what be the function of an endospore ?
one  seven .
f . rothfuss , m bender , r conrad .
“
survival and activity of bacteria in a deep , aged lake sediment ( lake constance ) .
"
microbial ecology three  three
no .
one
( one  nine  nine  seven  )  six  nine – seven  seven .
one  eight .
r . sinclair et al .
“
persistence of category a select agent in the environment .
"
applied and environmental microbiology
seven  four
no .
three
( two  zero  zero  eight  )  five  five  five – five  six  three .
chapter three
 the cell one  one  one plasma membrane structures that enclose the cytoplasm and internal structure of the cell be know collectively as the cell envelope .
in prokaryotic cell , the structure of the cell envelope vary depend on the type of cell and organism .
most ( but not all ) prokaryotic cell have a cell wall , but the makeup of this cell wall vary .
all cell ( prokaryotic and eukaryotic ) have a plasma membrane ( also call cytoplasmic membrane or cell membrane ) that exhibit selective permeability , allow some molecule to enter or leave the cell while restrict the passage of other .
the structure of the plasma membrane be often describe in term of the fluid mosaic model , which refer to the ability of membrane component to move fluidly within the plane of the membrane , as well as the mosaic - like composition of the component , which include a diverse array of lipid and protein component ( figure three  .  two  one ) .
the plasma membrane structure of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell type be a bilayer compose mainly of phospholipid form with ester linkage and protein .
these phospholipid and protein have the ability to move laterally within the plane of the membrane as well as between the two phospholipid layer .
figure three  .  two  one
the bacterial plasma membrane be a phospholipid bilayer with a variety of embed protein that perform various function for the cell .
note the presence of glycoprotein and glycolipid , whose carbohydrate component extend out from the surface of the cell .
the abundance and arrangement of these protein and lipid can vary greatly between specie .
archaeal membrane be fundamentally different from bacterial and eukaryotic membrane in a few significant way .
first , archaeal membrane phospholipid be form with ether linkage , in contrast to the ester linkage find in bacterial or eukaryotic cell membrane .
second , archaeal phospholipid have branch chain , whereas those of bacterial and eukaryotic cell be straight chain .
finally , although some archaeal membrane can be form of bilayer like those find in bacteria and eukaryote , other archaeal plasma membrane be lipid monolayer .
protein on the cell 's surface be important for a variety of function , include cell - to - cell communication , and sense environmental condition and pathogenic virulence factor .
membrane protein and phospholipid may have carbohydrate ( sugar ) associate with - pron - and be call glycoprotein or glycolipid , respectively .
these glycoprotein and glycolipid complex extend out from the surface of the cell , allow the cell to interact with the external environment ( figure three  .  two  one ) .
glycoprotein and glycolipid in the plasma membrane can vary considerably in chemical composition among archaea , bacteria , and eukaryote , allow scientist to use - pron - to characterize unique specie .
one  one  two chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five plasma membrane from different cell type also contain unique phospholipid , which contain fatty acid .
as describe in use biochemistry to identify microorganisms , phospholipid - derive fatty acid analysis ( plfa ) profile can be use to identify unique type of cell base on difference in fatty acid .
archaea , bacteria , and eukaryote each have a unique pfla profile .
membrane transport mechanisms one of the most important function of the plasma membrane be to control the transport of molecule into and out of the cell .
internal condition must be maintain within a certain range despite any change in the external environment .
the transport of substance across the plasma membrane allow cell to do so .
cell use various mode of transport across the plasma membrane .
for example , molecule move from a high concentration to a low concentration with the concentration gradient be transport by simple diffusion , also know as passive transport ( figure three  .  two  two ) .
some small molecule , like carbon dioxide , may cross the membrane bilayer directly by simple diffusion .
however , charge molecule , as well as large molecule , need the help of carrier or channel in the membrane .
these structure ferry molecule across the membrane , a process know as facilitated diffusion ( figure three  .  two  three ) .
active transport occur when cell move molecule across - pron - membrane against concentration gradient ( figure three  .  two  four ) .
a major difference between passive and active transport be that active transport require adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) or other form of energy to move molecule “ uphill .
"
therefore , active transport structure be often call " pump .
"
figure three  .  two  two simple diffusion down a concentration gradient directly across the phospholipid bilayer .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal ) chapter three
 the cell one  one  three figure three  .  two  three facilitated diffusion down a concentration gradient through a membrane protein .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal ) figure three  .  two  four active transport against a concentration gradient via a membrane pump that require energy .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
group translocation also transport substance into bacterial cell .
in this case , as a molecule move into a cell against - pron - concentration gradient , - pron - be chemically modify so that - pron - do not require transport against an unfavorable concentration gradient .
a common example of this be the bacterial phosphotransferase system , a series of carrier that phosphorylate ( i . e . , add phosphate ion to ) glucose or other sugar upon entry into cell .
since the phosphorylation of sugar be require during the early stage of sugar metabolism , the phosphotransferase system be consider to be an energy neutral system .
photosynthetic membrane structure
some prokaryotic cell , namely cyanobacteria and photosynthetic bacteria , have membrane structure that enable - pron - to perform photosynthesis .
these structure consist of an infolding of the plasma membrane that enclose photosynthetic pigment such as green chlorophyll and bacteriochlorophyll .
in cyanobacteria , these membrane structure be call thylakoid  in photosynthetic bacteria , - pron - be call chromatophore , lamellae , or chlorosome .
cell wall
the primary function of the cell wall be to protect the cell from harsh condition in the outside environment .
when one  one  four chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five present , there be notable similarity and difference among the cell wall of archaea , bacteria , and eukaryote .
the major component of bacterial cell wall be call peptidoglycan ( or murein )  - pron - be only find in bacteria .
structurally , peptidoglycan resemble a layer of meshwork or fabric ( figure three  .  two  five ) .
each layer be compose of long chain of alternate molecule of n - acetylglucosamine ( nag ) and n - acetylmuramic acid ( nam ) .
the structure of the long chain have significant two - dimensional tensile strength due to the formation of peptide bridge that connect nag and nam within each peptidoglycan layer .
in gram - negative bacteria , tetrapeptide chain extend from each nam unit be directly cross - link , whereas in gram - positive bacteria , these tetrapeptide chain be link by pentaglycine cross - bridge .
peptidoglycan subunit be make inside of the bacterial cell and then export and assemble in layer , give the cell - pron - shape .
since peptidoglycan be unique to bacteria , many antibiotic drug be design to interfere with peptidoglycan synthesis , weaken the cell wall and make bacterial cell more susceptible to the effect of osmotic pressure ( see mechanisms of antibacterial drugs ) .
in addition , certain cell of the human immune system be able
" recognize " bacterial pathogen by detect peptidoglycan on the surface of a bacterial cell  these cell then engulf and destroy the bacterial cell , use enzyme such as lysozyme , which break down and digest the peptidoglycan in - pron - cell wall
( see pathogen recognition and phagocytosis ) .
figure
three  .  two  five peptidoglycan be compose of polymer of alternate nam and nag subunit , which be cross - link by peptide bridge link nam subunit from various glycan chain .
this provide the cell wall with tensile strength in two dimension .
the gram staining protocol ( see staining microscopic specimens ) be use to differentiate two common type of cell wall structure ( figure three  .  two  six ) .
gram - positive cell have a cell wall consist of many layer of peptidoglycan total three  zero – one  zero  zero nm in thickness .
these peptidoglycan layer be commonly embed with teichoic acid ( ta ) , carbohydrate chain that extend through and beyond the peptidoglycan layer . [ one  nine ] ta be think to stabilize peptidoglycan by increase - pron - rigidity .
ta also play a role in the ability of pathogenic gram - positive bacteria such as streptococcus to bind to certain protein on the surface of host cell , enhance - pron - ability to cause infection .
in addition to peptidoglycan and ta , bacteria of the family mycobacteriaceae have an external layer of waxy mycolic acid in - pron - cell wall  as describe in staining microscopic specimens , these bacteria be refer to as acidfast , since acid - fast stain must be use to penetrate the mycolic acid layer for purpose of microscopy ( figure three  .  two  seven ) .
one  nine .
t . j . silhavy , d . kahne , s . walker .
“
the bacterial cell envelope .
"
cold spring harbor perspective in biology two
no .
five
( two  zero  one  zero  ) a zero  zero  zero  four  one  four .
chapter three
 the cell one  one  five figure three  .  two  six bacteria contain two common cell wall structural type .
gram - positive cell wall be structurally simple , contain a thick layer of peptidoglycan with embed teichoic acid external to the plasma membrane . [ two  zero ] gramnegative cell wall be structurally more complex , contain three layer 
the inner membrane , a thin layer of peptidoglycan , and an outer membrane contain lipopolysaccharide .
( credit  modification of work by “ franciscosp two ” / wikimedia commons ) figure three  .  two  seven ( a ) some gram - positive bacteria , include member of the mycobacteriaceae , produce waxy mycolic acid find exterior to - pron - structurally - distinct peptidoglycan .
( b )
the acid - fast staining protocol detect the presence of cell wall that be rich in mycolic acid .
acid - fast cell be stain red by carbolfuschin .
( credit a  modification of work by “ franciscosp two ” / wikimedia commons  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
gram - negative cell have a much thin layer of peptidoglycan ( no more than about four nm thick[ two  one ] ) than grampositive cell , and the overall structure of - pron - cell envelope be more complex .
in gram - negative cell , a gel - like matrix occupy the periplasmic space between the cell wall and the plasma membrane , and there be a second lipid bilayer call the outer membrane , which be external to the peptidoglycan layer ( figure three  .  two  six ) .
this outer membrane be attach to the peptidoglycan by murein lipoprotein .
the outer leaflet of the outer membrane contain the molecule lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) , which function as an endotoxin in infection involve gram - negative bacteria , contribute to symptom such as fever , hemorrhaging , and septic shock .
each lps molecule be compose two  zero .
b . zuber et al .
“ granular layer in the periplasmic space of gram - positive bacteria and fine structures of enterococcus gallinarum and
streptococcus gordonii
septa reveal by cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections .
" journal of bacteriology one  eight  eight
no .
one  eight ( two  zero  zero  six  )  six  six  five  two – six  six  six  zero two  one .
l . gana , s . chena , g . j . jensena .
“ molecular organization of gram - negative peptidoglycan .
”
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america one  zero  five
no .
four  eight
( two  zero  zero  eight  )  one  eight  nine  five  three – one  eight  nine  five  seven .
one  one  six chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five of lipid a , a core polysaccharide , and an o side chain that be compose of sugar - like molecule that comprise the external face of the lps ( figure three  .  two  eight ) .
the composition of the o side chain vary between different specie and strain of bacteria .
part of the o side chain call antigen can be detect use serological or immunological test to identify specific pathogenic strain like escherichia coli o one  five  seven  h seven , a deadly strain of bacteria that cause bloody diarrhea and kidney failure .
figure three  .  two  eight
the outer membrane of a gram - negative bacterial cell contain lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) , a toxin compose of lipid a embed in the outer membrane , a core polysaccharide , and the o side chain .
archaeal cell wall structure differ from that of bacteria in several significant way .
first , archaeal cell wall do not contain peptidoglycan  instead , - pron - contain a similar polymer call pseudopeptidoglycan ( pseudomurein ) in which nam be replace with a different subunit .
other archaea may have a layer of glycoprotein or polysaccharide that serve as the cell wall instead of pseudopeptidoglycan .
last , as be the case with some bacterial specie , there be a few archaea that appear to lack cell wall entirely .
glycocalyces and s - layers
although most prokaryotic cell have cell wall , some may have additional cell envelope structure exterior to the cell wall , such as glycocalyce and s - layer .
a glycocalyx be a sugar coat , of which there be two important type  capsule and slime layer .
a capsule be an organized layer locate outside of the cell wall and usually compose of polysaccharide or protein ( figure three  .  two  nine ) .
a slime layer be a less tightly organize layer that be only loosely attach to the cell wall and can be more easily wash off .
slime layer may be compose of polysaccharide , glycoprotein , or glycolipid .
glycocalyce allow cell to adhere to surface , aid in the formation of biofilm ( colony of microbe that form in layer on surface ) .
in nature , most microbe live in mixed community within biofilm , partly because the biofilm afford - pron - some level of protection .
biofilm generally hold water like a sponge , prevent desiccation .
- pron - also protect cell from predation and hinder the action of antibiotic and disinfectant .
all of these property be advantageous to the microbe live in a biofilm , but - pron - present challenge in a clinical setting , where the goal be chapter three  the cell one  one  seven often to eliminate microbe .
figure three  .  two  nine
( a ) capsules be a type of glycocalyx compose of an organized layer of polysaccharide .
( b )
a capsule stain of pseudomonas aeruginosa , a bacterial pathogen capable of cause many different type of infection in human .
( credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
the ability to produce a capsule can contribute to a microbe 's pathogenicity ( ability to cause disease ) because the capsule can make - pron - more difficult for phagocytic cell ( such as white blood cell ) to engulf and kill the microorganism .
streptococcus pneumoniae , for example , produce a capsule that be well known to aid in this bacterium 's pathogenicity .
as explain in staining microscopic specimen , capsule be difficult to stain for microscopy  negative staining technique be typically use .
an s - layer be another type of cell envelope structure  - pron - be compose of a mixture of structural protein and glycoprotein .
in bacteria , s - layer be find outside the cell wall , but in some archaea , the s - layer serve as the cell wall .
the exact function of s - layer be not entirely understand , and - pron - be difficult to study  but available evidence suggest that - pron - may play a variety of function in different prokaryotic cell , such as help the cell withstand osmotic pressure and , for certain pathogen , interact with the host immune system .
part three
after diagnose barbara with pneumonia , the pa write - pron - a prescription for amoxicillin , a commonlyprescribe type of penicillin derivative .
more than a week later , despite take the full course as direct , barbara still feel weak and be not fully recover , although - pron - be still able to get through - pron - daily activity .
- pron - return to the health center for a follow - up visit .
many type of bacteria , fungus , and virus can cause pneumonia .
amoxicillin target the peptidoglycan of bacterial cell wall .
since the amoxicillin have not resolve barbara 's symptom , the pa conclude that the causative agent probably lack peptidoglycan , mean that the pathogen could be a virus , a fungus , or a bacterium that lack peptidoglycan .
another possibility be that the pathogen be a bacterium contain peptidoglycan but have develop resistance to amoxicillin .

how can the pa definitively identify the cause of barbara 's pneumonia ?

what form of treatment should the pa prescribe , give that the amoxicillin be ineffective ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  one  eight chapter three  the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five filamentous appendages
many bacterial cell have protein appendage embed within - pron - cell envelope that extend outward , allow interaction with the environment .
these appendage can attach to other surface , transfer dna , or provide movement .
filamentous appendage include fimbriae , pili , and flagella .
fimbriae and pili fimbriae and pili be structurally similar and , because differentiation between the two be problematic , these term be often use interchangeably . [ two  two ]
[ two  three ]
the term fimbriae commonly refer to short bristle - like protein project from the cell surface by the hundred .
fimbriae enable a cell to attach to surface and to other cell .
for pathogenic bacteria , adherence to host cell be important for colonization , infectivity , and virulence .
adherence to surface be also important in biofilm formation .
the term pili ( singular  pilus ) commonly refer to longer , less numerous protein appendage that aid in attachment to surface ( figure three  .  three  zero ) .
a specific type of pilus , call the f pilus or sex pilus , be important in the transfer of dna between bacterial cell , which occur between member of the same generation when two cell physically transfer or exchange part of - pron - respective genome ( see how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity ) .
figure
three  .  three  zero bacteria may produce two different type of protein appendage that aid in surface attachment .
fimbriae typically be more numerous and short , whereas pili ( show here ) be long and less numerous per cell .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
group a strep
before the structure and function of the various component of the bacterial cell envelope be well understand , scientist be already use cell envelope characteristic to classify bacteria .
in one  nine  three  three , rebecca lancefield propose a method for serotype various β - hemolytic strain of streptococcus specie use an agglutination assay , a technique use the clumping of bacteria to detect specific cell - surface antigen .
in do so , lancefield discover that one group of s . pyogene , find in group a , be associate with a variety of human disease .
- pron - determine that various strain of group a strep could be distinguish from each other base on variation in specific cell surface protein that - pron - name m protein .
today , more than eight  zero different strain of group a strep have be identify base on m protein .
various strain of group a strep be associate with a wide variety of human infection , include streptococcal micro connections two  two .
j . a . garnetta et al .
“
structural insights into the biogenesis and biofilm formation by the escherichia coli common pilus .
”
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america one  zero  nine
no .
one  zero
( two  zero  one  two  )  three  nine  five  zero – three  nine  five  five .
two  three .
t . proft , e . n . baker .
“
pili in gram - negative and gram - positive bacteria - structure , assembly and - pron - role in disease .
"
cellular and molecular life
sciences six  six ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  six  one  three .
chapter three

the cell one  one  nine pharyngitis ( strep throat ) , impetigo , toxic shock syndrome , scarlet fever , rheumatic fever , and necrotize fasciitis .
the m protein be an important virulence factor for group a strep , help these strain evade the immune system .
change in m protein appear to alter the infectivity of a particular strain of group a strep .
flagella flagella be structure use by cell to move in aqueous environment .
bacterial flagella act like propeller .
- pron - be stiff spiral filament compose of flagellin protein subunit that extend outward from the cell and spin in solution .
the basal body be the motor for the flagellum and be embed in the plasma membrane ( figure three  .  three  one ) .
a hook region connect the basal body to the filament .
gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria have different basal body configuration due to difference in cell wall structure .
different type of motile bacteria exhibit different arrangement of flagella ( figure three  .  three  two ) .
a bacterium with a singular flagellum , typically locate at one end of the cell ( polar ) , be say to have a monotrichous flagellum .
an example of a monotrichously flagellate bacterial pathogen be vibrio cholerae , the gram - negative bacterium that cause cholera .
cell with amphitrichous flagella have a flagellum or tuft of flagella at each end .
an example be spirillum minor , the cause of spirillary ( asian ) rat - bite fever or sodoku .
cell with lophotrichous flagella have a tuft at one end of the cell .
the gram - negative bacillus pseudomonas aeruginosa , an opportunistic pathogen know for cause many infection , include “ swimmer 's ear " and burn wound infection , have lophotrichous flagellum .
flagella that cover the entire surface of a bacterial cell be call peritrichous flagella .
the gram - negative bacterium e . coli show a peritrichous arrangement of flagella .
figure three  .  three  one
the basic structure of a bacterial flagellum consist of a basal body , hook , and filament .
the basal body composition and arrangement differ between gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria .
( credit  modification of work by “ ladyofhats” / mariana ruiz villareal )
one  two  zero chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  three  two
flagellate bacteria may exhibit multiple arrangement of - pron - flagella .
common arrangement include monotrichous , amphitrichous , lophotrichous , or peritrichous .
directional movement depend on the configuration of the flagella .
bacteria can move in response to a variety of environmental signal , include light ( phototaxis ) , magnetic field ( magnetotaxis ) use magnetosome , and , most commonly , chemical gradient ( chemotaxis ) .
purposeful movement toward a chemical attractant , like a food source , or away from a repellent , like a poisonous chemical , be achieve by increase the length of run and decrease the length of tumble .
when run , flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction , allow the bacterial cell to move forward .
in a peritrichous bacterium , the flagella be all bundle together in a very streamlined way ( figure three  .  three  three ) , allow for efficient movement .
when tumble , flagella be splay out while rotate in a clockwise direction , create a looping motion and prevent meaningful forward movement but reorient the cell toward the direction of the attractant .
when an attractant exist , run and tumble still occur  however , the length of run be long , while the length of the tumble be reduce , allow overall movement toward the high concentration of the attractant .
when no chemical gradient exist , the length of run and tumble be more equal , and overall movement be more random ( figure three  .  three  four ) .
figure three  .  three  three bacteria achieve directional movement by change the rotation of - pron - flagella .
in a cell with peritrichous flagellum , the flagella bundle when - pron - rotate in a counterclockwise direction , result in a run .
however , when the flagella rotate in a clockwise direction , the flagella be no longer bundle , result in tumble .
chapter three  the cell one  two  one figure three  .  three  four
without a chemical gradient , flagellar rotation cycle between counterclockwise ( run ) and clockwise ( tumble ) with no overall directional movement .
however , when a chemical gradient of an attractant exist , the length of run be extend , while the length of tumble be decrease .
this lead to chemotaxis  an overall directional movement toward the high concentration of the attractant .

what be the peptidoglycan layer and how do - pron - differ between gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria ?

compare and contrast monotrichous , amphitrichous , lophotrichous , and peritrichous flagella .
three  .  four unique characteristics of eukaryotic cells
learning objectives

explain the distinguish characteristic of eukaryotic cell 
describe internal and external structure of prokaryotic cell in term of - pron - physical structure , chemical structure , and function

identify and describe structure and organelle unique to eukaryotic cell
 compare and contrast similar structure find in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell eukaryotic organism include protozoan , algae , fungus , plant , and animal .
some eukaryotic cell be independent , single - celle microorganism , whereas other be part of multicellular organism .
the cell of eukaryotic organism have several distinguish characteristic .
above all , eukaryotic cell be define by the presence of a nucleus surround by a complex nuclear membrane .
also , eukaryotic cell be characterize by the presence of membranebound organelle in the cytoplasm .
organelle such as mitochondria , the endoplasmic reticulum ( er ) , golgi apparatus , lysosome , and peroxisome be hold in place by the cytoskeleton , an internal network that support one  two  two chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five transport of intracellular component and help maintain cell shape ( figure three  .  three  five ) .
the genome of eukaryotic cell be package in multiple , rod - shape chromosome as oppose to the single , circular - shaped chromosome that characterize most prokaryotic cell .
table three  .  two compare the characteristic of eukaryotic cell structure with those of bacteria and archaea .
figure three  .  three  five
an illustration of a generalize , single - celle eukaryotic organism .
note that cell of eukaryotic organism vary greatly in term of structure and function , and a particular cell may not have all of the structure show here .
summary of cell structures cell structure prokaryote bacteria archaea eukaryotes size ~ zero  .  five – one μm ~ zero  .  five – one μm
~ five – two  zero μm surface area - tovolume ratio
high high low nucleus
no
no
yes table three  .  two chapter three
 the cell one  two  three summary of cell structures cell structure prokaryote
bacteria archaea eukaryotes genome characteristic

single chromosome

circular

haploid
 lacks histone

single chromosome

circular

haploid

contains histone

multiple chromosome

linear  haploid or diploid 
contains histone cell division binary fission
binary fission mitosis , meiosis membrane lipid composition 
ester - link 
straight - chain fatty acid

bilayer 
ether - link  branched isoprenoid

bilayer or monolayer 
ester - link 
straight - chain fatty acid
 sterols

bilayer cell wall composition  peptidoglycan , or 
none  pseudopeptidoglycan , or  glycopeptide , or  polysaccharide , or 
protein ( s - layer ) , or 
none  cellulose ( plant , some algae )

chitin ( molluscs , insect , crustacean , and fungi )

silica ( some algae )

most other lack cell wall motility structure rigid spiral flagella compose of flagellin rigid spiral flagella compose of archaeal flagellin flexible flagella and cilia compose of microtubule
membranebound organelle
no
no
yes endomembrane system
no
no
yes ( er , golgi , lysosome )
ribosomes seven  zero s
seven  zero s  eight  zero s in cytoplasm and rough er  seven  zero s in mitochondria , chloroplast table three  .  two cell morphologies eukaryotic cell display a wide variety of different cell morphology .
possible shape include spheroid , ovoid , cuboidal , cylindrical , flat , lenticular , fusiform , discoidal , crescent , ring stellate , and polygonal ( figure three  .  three  six ) .
some eukaryotic cell be irregular in shape , and some be capable of change shape .
the shape of a particular type of eukaryotic cell may be influence by factor such as - pron - primary function , the organization of - pron - cytoskeleton , the viscosity of - pron - cytoplasm , the rigidity of - pron - cell membrane or cell wall ( if - pron - have one ) , and the physical pressure exert on - pron - by the surround environment and / or adjoin cell .
one  two  four chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  three  six eukaryotic cell come in a variety of cell shape .
( a ) spheroid chromulina alga .
( b )
fusiform shape trypanosoma .
( c )
bell - shape vorticella .
( d )
ovoid paramecium .
( e ) ring - shape plasmodium ovale .
( credit a  modification of work by noaa  credit b , e  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

identify two difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell .
nucleus unlike prokaryotic cell , in which dna be loosely contain in the nucleoid region , eukaryotic cell possess a nucleus , which be surround by a complex nuclear membrane that house the dna genome ( figure three  .  three  seven ) .
by contain the cell 's dna , the nucleus ultimately control all activity of the cell and also serve an essential role in reproduction and heredity .
eukaryotic cell typically have - pron - dna organize into multiple linear chromosome .
the dna within the nucleus be highly organized and condense to fit inside the nucleus , which be accomplish by wrap the dna around protein call histone .
chapter three
 the cell one  two  five figure three  .  three  seven eukaryotic cell have a well - define nucleus .
the nucleus of this mammalian lung cell be the large , dark , oval - shape structure in the low half of the image .
although most eukaryotic cell have only one nucleus , exception exist .
for example , protozoan of the genus paramecium typically have two complete nucleus  a small nucleus that be use for reproduction ( micronucleus ) and a large nucleus that direct cellular metabolism ( macronucleus ) .
additionally , some fungi transiently form cell with two nucleus , call heterokaryotic cell , during sexual reproduction .
cell whose nucleus divide , but whose cytoplasm do not , be call coenocyte .
the nucleus be bind by a complex nuclear membrane , often call the nuclear envelope , that consist of two distinct lipid bilayer that be contiguous with each other ( figure three  .  three  eight ) .
despite these connection between the inner and outer membrane , each membrane contain unique lipid and protein on - pron - inner and outer surface .
the nuclear envelope contain nuclear pore , which be large , rosette - shape protein complex that control the movement of material into and out of the nucleus .
the overall shape of the nucleus be determine by the nuclear lamina , a meshwork of intermediate filament find just inside the nuclear envelope membrane .
outside the nucleus , additional intermediate filament form a loose mesh and serve to anchor the nucleus in position within the cell .
figure three  .  three  eight
in this fluorescent microscope image , all the intermediate filament have be stain with a bright green fluorescent stain .
the nuclear lamina be the intense bright green ring around the faint red nucleus .
nucleolus
the nucleolus be a dense region within the nucleus where ribosomal rna ( rrna ) biosynthesis occur .
in addition , the nucleolus be also the site where assembly of ribosome begin .
preribosomal complex be assemble from rrna and protein in the nucleolus  - pron - be then transport out to the cytoplasm , where ribosome assembly be complete ( figure three  .  three  nine ) .
one  two  six chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  three  nine ( a )
the nucleolus be the dark , dense area within the nucleus .
- pron - be the site of rrna synthesis and preribosomal assembly .
( b ) electron micrograph show the nucleolus .
ribosomes ribosomes find in eukaryotic organelle such as mitochondria or chloroplast have seven  zero s ribosome - the same size as prokaryotic ribosome .
however , nonorganelle - associate ribosome in eukaryotic cell be eight  zero s ribosome , compose of a four  zero s small subunit and a six  zero s large subunit .
in term of size and composition , this make - pron - distinct from the ribosome of prokaryotic cell .
the two type of nonorganelle - associate eukaryotic ribosome be define by - pron - location in the cell  free ribosome and membrane - bind ribosome .
free ribosome be find in the cytoplasm and serve to synthesize water - soluble protein  membrane - bind ribosome be find attach to the rough endoplasmic reticulum and make protein for insertion into the cell membrane or protein destine for export from the cell .
the difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosome be clinically relevant because certain antibiotic drug be design to target one or the other .
for example , cycloheximide target eukaryotic action , whereas chloramphenicol target prokaryotic ribosomes . [ two  four ]
since human cell be eukaryotic , - pron - generally be not harm by antibiotic that destroy the prokaryotic ribosome in bacteria .
however , sometimes negative side effect may occur because mitochondria in human cell contain prokaryotic ribosome .
endomembrane system
the endomembrane system , unique to eukaryotic cell , be a series of membranous tubule , sac , and flatten disk that synthesize many cell component and move material around within the cell ( figure three  .  four  zero ) .
because of - pron - large cell size , eukaryotic cell require this system to transport material that can not be disperse by diffusion alone .
the endomembrane system comprise several organelle and connection between - pron - , include the endoplasmic reticulum , golgi apparatus , lysosome , and vesicle .
two  four .
a . e . barnhill , m . t . brewer , s . a . carlson .
“ adverse effects of antimicrobials via predictable or idiosyncratic inhibition of host mitochondrial components .
”
antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy five  six
no .
eight
( two  zero  one  two  )  four  zero  four  six – four  zero  five  one .
chapter three
 the cell one  two  seven figure three  .  four  zero
the endomembrane system be compose of a series of membranous intracellular structure that facilitate movement of material throughout the cell and to the cell membrane .
endoplasmic reticulum
the endoplasmic reticulum ( er ) be an interconnected array of tubule and cisterna ( flattened sac ) with a single lipid bilayer ( figure three  .  four  one ) .
the space inside of the cisterna be call luman of the er .
there be two type of er , rough endoplasmic reticulum ( rer ) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum ( ser ) .
these two different type of er be site for the synthesis of distinctly different type of molecule .
rer be stud with ribosome bind on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane .
these ribosome make protein destine for the plasma membrane ( figure three  .  four  one ) .
follow synthesis , these protein be insert into the membrane of the rer .
small sac of the rer contain these newly synthesize protein then bud off as transport vesicle and move either to the golgi apparatus for further processing , directly to the plasma membrane , to the membrane of another organelle , or out of the cell .
transport vesicle be single - lipid , bilayer , membranous sphere with hollow interior that carry molecule .
ser do not have ribosome and , therefore , appear “ smooth .
”
- pron - be involve in biosynthesis of lipid , carbohydrate metabolism , and detoxification of toxic compound within the cell .
figure three  .  four  one
the rough endoplasmic reticulum be stud with ribosome for the synthesis of membrane protein ( which give - pron - - pron - rough appearance ) .
golgi apparatus
the golgi apparatus be discover within the endomembrane system in one  eight  nine  eight by italian scientist camillo golgi ( one  eight  four  three – one  nine  two  six ) , who develop a novel staining technique that show stack membrane structure within the cell of plasmodium , the causative agent of malaria .
the golgi apparatus be compose of a series of membranous disk call dictyosome , each have a single lipid bilayer , that be stack together ( figure three  .  four  two ) .
one  two  eight chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five enzymes in the golgi apparatus modify lipid and protein transport from the er to the golgi , often add carbohydrate component to - pron - , produce glycolipid , glycoprotein , or proteoglycan .
glycolipid and glycoprotein be often insert into the plasma membrane and be important for signal recognition by other cell or infectious particle .
different type of cell can be distinguish from one another by the structure and arrangement of the glycolipid and glycoprotein contain in - pron - plasma membrane .
these glycolipid and glycoprotein commonly also serve as cell surface receptor .
transport vesicle leave the er fuse with a golgi apparatus on - pron - receiving , or cis , face .
the protein be process within the golgi apparatus , and then additional transport vesicle contain the modify protein and lipid pinch off from the golgi apparatus on - pron - outgoing , or tran , face .
these outgoing vesicle move to and fuse with the plasma membrane or the membrane of other organelle .
exocytosis be the process by which secretory vesicle ( spherical membranous sac ) release - pron - content to the cell 's exterior ( figure three  .  four  two ) .
all cell have constitutive secretory pathway in which secretory vesicle transport soluble protein that be release from the cell continually ( constitutively ) .
certain specialized cell also have regulate secretory pathway , which be use to store soluble protein in secretory vesicle .
regulated secretion involve substance that be only release in response to certain event or signal .
for example , certain cell of the human immune system ( e . g . , mast cell ) secrete histamine in response to the presence of foreign object or pathogen in the body .
histamine be a compound that trigger various mechanism use by the immune system to eliminate pathogen .
figure three  .  four  two
a transmission electron micrograph ( leave ) of a golgi apparatus in a white blood cell .
the illustration ( right ) show the cup - shape , stacked disk and several transport vesicle .
the golgi apparatus modifie lipid and protein , produce glycolipid and glycoprotein , respectively , which be commonly insert into the plasma membrane .
lysosome
in the one  nine  six  zero , belgian scientist christian de duve ( one  nine  one  seven – two  zero  one  three ) discover lysosome , membrane - bind organelle of the endomembrane system that contain digestive enzyme .
certain type of eukaryotic cell use lysosome to break down various particle , such as food , damage organelle or cellular debris , microorganism , or immune complex .
compartmentalization of the digestive enzyme within the lysosome allow the cell to efficiently digest matter without harm the cytoplasmic component of the cell .
chapter three  the cell one  two  nine
 name the component of the endomembrane system and describe the function of each component .
peroxisomes christian de duve be also credit with the discovery of peroxisome , membrane - bind organelle that be not part of the endomembrane system ( figure three  .  four  three ) .
peroxisome form independently in the cytoplasm from the synthesis of peroxin protein by free ribosome and the incorporation of these peroxin protein into exist peroxisome .
grow peroxisome then divide by a process similar to binary fission .
peroxisome be first name for - pron - ability to produce hydrogen peroxide , a highly reactive molecule that help to break down molecule such as uric acid , amino acid , and fatty acid .
peroxisome also possess the enzyme catalase , which can degrade hydrogen peroxide .
along with the ser , peroxisome also play a role in lipid biosynthesis .
like lysosome , the compartmentalization of these degradative molecule within an organelle help protect the cytoplasmic content from unwanted damage .
the peroxisome of certain organism be specialize to meet - pron - particular functional need .
for example , glyoxysome be modify peroxisome of yeast and plant cell that perform several metabolic function , include the production of sugar molecule .
similarly , glycosome be modify peroxisome make by certain trypanosome , the pathogenic protozoan that cause chagas disease and african sleep sickness .
figure three  .  four  three
a transmission electron micrograph ( leave ) of a cell contain a peroxisome .
the illustration ( right ) show the location of peroxisome in a cell .
these eukaryotic structure play a role in lipid biosynthesis and break down various molecule .
- pron - may also have other specialized function depend on the cell type .
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by american society for microbiology )
cytoskeleton eukaryotic cell have an internal cytoskeleton make of microfilament , intermediate filament , and microtubule .
this matrix of fiber and tube provide structural support as well as a network over which material can be transport within the cell and on which organelle can be anchor ( figure three  .  four  four ) .
for example , the process of exocytosis involve the movement of a vesicle via the cytoskeletal network to the plasma membrane , where - pron - can release - pron - content .
one  three  zero chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  four  four
the cytoskeleton be a network of microfilament , intermediate filament , and microtubule find throughout the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell .
in these fluorescently label animal cell , the microtubule be green , the actin microfilament be red , the nucleus be blue , and keratin ( a type of intermediate filament ) be yellow .
microfilament be compose of two intertwined strand of actin , each compose of actin monomer form filamentous cable six nm in diameter[ two  five ]
( figure three  .  four  five ) .
the actin filament work together with motor protein , like myosin , to effect muscle contraction in animal or the amoeboid movement of some eukaryotic microbe .
in ameboid organism , actin can be find in two form  a stiffer , polymerized , gel form and a more fluid , unpolymerized soluble form .
actin in the gel form create stability in the ectoplasm , the gel - like area of cytoplasm just inside the plasma membrane of ameboid protozoan .
temporary extension of the cytoplasmic membrane call pseudopodia ( mean " false foot " ) be produce through the forward flow of soluble actin filament into the pseudopodia , follow by the gel - sol cycling of the actin filament , result in cell motility .
once the cytoplasm extend outward , form a pseudopodium , the remain cytoplasm flow up to join the leading edge , thereby create forward locomotion .
beyond amoeboid movement , microfilament be also involve in a variety of other process in eukaryotic cell , include cytoplasmic streaming ( the movement or circulation of cytoplasm within the cell ) , cleavage furrow formation during cell division , and muscle movement in animal ( figure three  .  four  five ) .
these function be the result of the dynamic nature of microfilament , which can polymerize and depolymerize relatively easily in response to cellular signal , and - pron - interaction with molecular motor in different type of eukaryotic cell .
two  five .
fuchs e , cleveland dw .
“
a structural scaffolding of intermediate filaments in health and disease .
”
science two  seven  nine
no .
five  three  five  zero
( one  nine  nine  eight  )  five  one  four – five  one  nine .
chapter three
 the cell one  three  one figure three  .  four  five ( a )
a microfilament be compose of a pair of actin filament .
( b )
each actin filament be a string of polymerized actin monomer .
( c )
the dynamic nature of actin , due to - pron - polymerization and depolymerization and - pron - association with myosin , allow microfilament to be involve in a variety of cellular process , include ameboid movement , cytoplasmic streaming , contractile ring formation during cell division , and muscle contraction in animal .
intermediate filament ( figure three  .  four  six ) be a diverse group of cytoskeletal filament that act as cable within the cell .
- pron - be term " intermediate " because - pron - one  zero  - nm diameter be thick than that of actin but thin than that of microtubules . [ two  six ]
- pron - be compose of several strand of polymerized subunit that , in turn , be make up of a wide variety of monomer .
intermediate filament tend to be more permanent in the cell and maintain the position of the nucleus .
- pron - also form the nuclear lamina ( lining or layer ) just inside the nuclear envelope .
additionally , intermediate filament play a role in anchor cell together in animal tissue .
the intermediate filament protein desmin be find in desmosome , the protein structure that join muscle cell together and help - pron - resist external physical force .
the intermediate filament protein keratin be a structural protein find in hair , skin , and nail .
two  six .
e . fuchs , d . w . cleveland .
“
a structural scaffolding of intermediate filaments in health and disease .
”
science two  seven  nine
no .
five  three  five  zero ( one  nine  nine  eight  )  five  one  four – five  one  nine . one  three  two chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  four  six ( a ) intermediate filament be compose of multiple strand of polymerized subunit .
- pron - be more permanent than other cytoskeletal structure and serve a variety of function .
( b ) intermediate filament form much of the nuclear lamina .
( c ) intermediate filament form the desmosome between cell in some animal tissue .
( credit c " illustration
" 
modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
microtubules ( figure three  .  four  seven ) be a third type of cytoskeletal fiber compose of tubulin dimer ( α tubulin and β tubulin ) .
these form hollow tube two  three nm in diameter that be use as girder within the cytoskeleton . [ two  seven ]
like microfilament , microtubule be dynamic and have the ability to rapidly assemble and disassemble .
microtubule also work with motor protein ( such as dynein and kinesin ) to move organelle and vesicle around within the cytoplasm .
additionally , microtubule be the main component of eukaryotic flagella and cilia , compose both the filament and the basal body component ( figure three  .  five  four ) .
figure three  .  four  seven
( a ) microtubule be hollow structure compose of polymerized tubulin dimer .
( b )
- pron - be involve in several cellular process , include the movement of organelle throughout the cytoplasm .
motor protein carry organelle along microtubule track that crisscross the entire cell .
( credit b  modification of work by national institute on aging )
in addition , microtubule be involve in cell division , form the mitotic spindle that serve to separate chromosome during mitosis and meiosis .
the mitotic spindle be produce by two centrosome , which be essentially microtubule - organize center , at opposite end of the cell .
each centrosome be compose of a pair of centriole position at right angle to each other , and each centriole be an array of nine parallel microtubule arrange in triplet two  seven .
e . fuchs , d . w . cleveland .
“
a structural scaffolding of intermediate filaments in health and disease .
”
science two  seven  nine
no .
five  three  five  zero
( one  nine  nine  eight  )  five  one  four – five  one  nine .
chapter three
 the cell one  three  three ( figure three  .  four  eight ) .
figure three  .  four  eight ( a )
a centrosome be compose of two centriole position at right angle to each other .
each centriole be compose of nine triplet of microtubule hold together by accessory protein .
( b )
in animal cell , the centrosome ( arrow ) serve as microtubule - organize center of the mitotic spindle during mitosis .

compare and contrast the three type of cytoskeletal structure describe in this section .
mitochondria
the large , complex organelle in which aerobic cellular respiration occur in eukaryotic cell be call mitochondria ( figure three  .  four  nine ) .
the term " mitochondrion " be first coin by german microbiologist carl benda in one  eight  nine  eight and be later connect with the process of respiration by otto warburg in one  nine  one  three .
scientist during the one  nine  six  zero s discover that mitochondria have - pron - own genome and seven  zero s ribosome .
the mitochondrial genome be find to be bacterial , when - pron - be sequence in one  nine  seven  six .
these finding ultimately support the endosymbiotic theory propose by lynn margulis , which state that mitochondria originally arise through an endosymbiotic event in which a bacterium capable of aerobic cellular respiration be take up by phagocytosis into a host cell and remain as a viable intracellular component .
each mitochondrion have two lipid membrane .
the outer membrane be a remnant of the original host cell 's membrane structure .
the inner membrane be derive from the bacterial plasma membrane .
the electron transport chain for aerobic respiration use integral protein embed in the inner membrane .
the mitochondrial matrix , correspond to the location of the original bacterium 's cytoplasm , be the current location of many metabolic enzyme .
- pron - also contain mitochondrial dna and seven  zero s ribosome .
invagination of the inner membrane , call cristae , evolve to increase surface area for the location of biochemical reaction .
the fold pattern of the cristae differ among various type of eukaryotic cell and be use to distinguish different eukaryotic organism from each other .
one  three  four chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  four  nine
each mitochondrion be surround by two membrane , the inner of which be extensively fold into cristae and be the site of the intermembrane space .
the mitochondrial matrix contain the mitochondrial dna , ribosome , and metabolic enzyme .
the transmission electron micrograph of a mitochondrion , on the right , show both membrane , include cristae and the mitochondrial matrix .
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by matthew britton  scale - bar datum from matt russell )
chloroplasts plant cell and algal cell contain chloroplast , the organelle in which photosynthesis occur ( figure three  .  five  zero ) .
all chloroplast have at least three membrane system  the outer membrane , the inner membrane , and the thylakoid membrane system .
inside the outer and inner membrane be the chloroplast stroma , a gel - like fluid that make up much of a chloroplast 's volume , and in which the thylakoid system float .
the thylakoid system be a highly dynamic collection of fold membrane sac .
- pron - be where the green photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll be find and the light reaction of photosynthesis occur .
in most plant chloroplast , the thylakoid be arrange in stack call grana ( singular  granum ) , whereas in some algal chloroplast , the thylakoid be free floating .
figure three  .  five  zero
photosynthesis take place in chloroplast , which have an outer membrane and an inner membrane .
stack of thylakoid call grana form a third membrane layer .
other organelle similar to mitochondrion have arise in other type of eukaryote , but - pron - role differ .
hydrogenosome be find in some anaerobic eukaryote and serve as the location of anaerobic hydrogen production .
hydrogenosomes typically lack - pron - own dna and ribosome .
kinetoplast be a variation of the mitochondria find in some eukaryotic pathogen .
in these organism , each cell have a single , long , branched mitochondrion in which kinetoplast dna , organize as multiple circular piece of dna , be find concentrate at one pole of the cell .
chapter three  the cell one  three  five mitochondria - relate organelles in protozoan parasites
many protozoan , include several protozoan parasite that cause infection in human , can be identify by - pron - unusual appearance .
distinguish feature may include complex cell morphology , the presence of unique organelle , or the absence of common organelle .
the protozoan parasite giardia lamblia and trichomonas vaginalis be two example .
g . lamblia , a frequent cause of diarrhea in human and many other animal , be an anaerobic parasite that possess two nucleus and several flagella .
- pron - golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum be greatly reduce , and - pron - lack mitochondria completely .
however , - pron - do have organelle know as mitosome , doublemembrane - bind organelle that appear to be severely reduce mitochondria .
this have lead scientist to believe that g . lamblia 's ancestor once possess mitochondria that evolve to become mitosome .
t . vaginalis , which cause the sexually transmit infection vaginitis , be another protozoan parasite that lack conventional mitochondria .
instead , - pron - possess hydrogenosome , mitochondrial - relate , double - membranebound organelle that produce molecular hydrogen use in cellular metabolism .
scientist believe that hydrogenosome , like mitosome , also evolve from mitochondria . [ two  eight ]
plasma membrane
the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cell be similar in structure to the prokaryotic plasma membrane in that - pron - be compose mainly of phospholipid form a bilayer with embed peripheral and integral protein
( figure three  .  five  one ) .
these membrane component move within the plane of the membrane accord to the fluid mosaic model .
however , unlike the prokaryotic membrane , eukaryotic membrane contain sterol , include cholesterol , that alter membrane fluidity .
additionally , many eukaryotic cell contain some specialized lipid , include sphingolipid , which be think to play a role in maintain membrane stability as well as be involve in signal transduction pathway and cell - to - cell communication .
micro connections two  eight .
n . yarlett , j . h . p . hackstein .
“
hydrogenosomes 
one organelle , multiple origins .
"
bioscience five  five
no .
eight ( two  zero  zero  five  )  six  five  seven – six  five  eight .
one  three  six chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure three  .  five  one
the eukaryotic plasma membrane be compose of a lipid bilayer with many embed or associate protein .
- pron - contain cholesterol for the maintenance of membrane , as well as glycoprotein and glycolipid that be important in the recognition other cell or pathogen .
membrane transport mechanisms
the process of simple diffusion , facilitated diffusion , and active transport be use in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell .
however , eukaryotic cell also have the unique ability to perform various type of endocytosis , the uptake of matter through plasma membrane invagination and vacuole / vesicle formation ( figure three  .  five  two ) .
a type of endocytosis involve the engulfment of large particle through membrane invagination be call phagocytosis , which mean “ cell eat .
"
in phagocytosis , particle ( or other cell ) be enclose in a pocket within the membrane , which then pinch off from the membrane to form a vacuole that completely surround the particle .
another type of endocytosis be call pinocytosis , which mean “ cell drinking .
"
in pinocytosis , small , dissolve material and liquid be take into the cell through small vesicle .
saprophytic fungi , for example , obtain - pron - nutrient from dead and decaying matter largely through pinocytosis .
receptor - mediate endocytosis be a type of endocytosis that be initiate by specific molecule call ligand when - pron - bind to cell surface receptor on the membrane .
receptor - mediate endocytosis be the mechanism that peptide and amine - derive hormone use to enter cell and be also use by various virus and bacteria for entry into host cell .
chapter three  the cell one  three  seven figure three  .  five  two three variation of endocytosis be show .
( a )
in phagocytosis , the cell membrane surround the particle and pinch off to form an intracellular vacuole .
( b )
in pinocytosis , the cell membrane surround a small volume of fluid and pinch off , form a vesicle .
( c )
in receptor - mediate endocytosis , the uptake of substance be target to a specific substance ( a ligand ) that bind at the receptor on the external cell membrane .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villarreal )
the process by which secretory vesicle release - pron - content to the cell 's exterior be call exocytosis .
vesicle move toward the plasma membrane and then meld with the membrane , eject - pron - content out of the cell .
exocytosis be use by cell to remove waste product and may also be use to release chemical signal that can be take up by other cell .
cell wall
in addition to a plasma membrane , some eukaryotic cell have a cell wall .
cell of fungi , algae , plant , and even some protist have cell wall .
depend upon the type of eukaryotic cell , cell wall can be make of a wide range of material , include cellulose ( fungus and plant )  biogenic silica , calcium carbonate , agar , and carrageenan ( protist and algae )  or chitin ( fungi ) .
in general , all cell wall provide structural stability for the cell and protection from environmental stress such as desiccation , change in osmotic pressure , and traumatic injury . [ two  nine ] extracellular matrix cell of animal and some protozoan do not have cell wall to help maintain shape and provide structural stability .
instead , these type of eukaryotic cell produce an extracellular matrix for this purpose .
- pron - secrete a sticky mass of carbohydrate and protein into the space between adjacent cell ( figure three  .  five  three ) .
some protein component assemble into a basement membrane to which the remain extracellular matrix component adhere .
proteoglycans typically form the bulky mass of the extracellular matrix while fibrous protein , like collagen , provide strength .
both proteoglycan and collagen be attach to fibronectin protein , which , in turn , be attach to integrin protein .
these integrin protein interact with transmembrane protein in the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cell that lack cell wall .
in animal cell , the extracellular matrix allow cell within tissue to withstand external stress and transmit signal from the outside of the cell to the inside .
the amount of extracellular matrix be quite extensive in various type of two  nine .
m . dudzick .
“ protists .
"
openstax cnx .
november two  seven , two  zero  one  three .
http / / cnx . org / contents / f seven  zero  four  eight bb six  - e four  six  two  -  four  five  nine b -  eight  zero  five c - ef two  nine  one cf seven  zero  four  nine c at  one one  three  eight chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five connective tissue , and variation in the extracellular matrix can give different type of tissue - pron - distinct property .
in addition , a host cell 's extracellular matrix be often the site where microbial pathogen attach - pron - to establish infection .
for example , streptococcus pyogene , the bacterium that cause strep throat and various other infection , bind to fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of the cell line the oropharynx ( upper region of the throat ) .
figure three  .  five  three
the extracellular matrix be compose of protein and carbohydrate component .
- pron - protect cell from physical stress and transmit signal arrive at the outside edge of the tissue to cell deep within the tissue .
flagella and cilia
some eukaryotic cell use flagella for locomotion  however , eukaryotic flagella be structurally distinct from those find in prokaryotic cell .
whereas the prokaryotic flagellum be a stiff , rotate structure , a eukaryotic flagellum be more like a flexible whip compose of nine parallel pair of microtubule surround a central pair of microtubule .
this arrangement be refer to as a nine + two array ( figure three  .  five  four ) .
the parallel microtubule use dynein motor protein to move relative to each other , cause the flagellum to bend .
cilia ( singular  cilium ) be a similar external structure find in some eukaryotic cell .
unique to eukaryote , cilium be short than flagella and often cover the entire surface of a cell  however , - pron - be structurally similar to flagella ( a nine + two array of microtubule ) and use the same mechanism for movement .
a structure call a basal body be find at the base of each cilium and flagellum .
the basal body , which attach the cilium or flagellum to the cell , be compose of an array of triplet microtubule similar to that of a centriole but embed in the plasma membrane .
because of - pron - short length , cilium use a rapid , flexible , wave motion .
in addition to motility , cilium may have other function such as sweeping particle past or into cell .
for example , ciliate protozoan use the sweeping of cilia to move food particle into - pron - mouthpart , and ciliate cell in the mammalian respiratory tract beat in synchrony to sweep mucus chapter three
 the cell one  three  nine and debris up and out of the lung
( figure three  .  five  four ) .
figure three  .  five  four ( a )
eukaryotic flagella and cilium be compose of a nine + two array of microtubule , as see in this transmission electron micrograph cross - section .
( b )
the sliding of these microtubule relative to each other cause a flagellum to bend .
( c )
an illustration of trichomonas vaginalis , a flagellate protozoan parasite that cause vaginitis .
( d )
many protozoan , like this paramecium , have numerous cilium that aid in locomotion as well as in feeding .
note the mouth opening show here .
( credit d  modification of work by university of vermont / national institutes of health )

explain how the cellular envelope of eukaryotic cell compare to that of prokaryotic cell .

explain the difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic flagella .
one  four  zero chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five resolution
since amoxicillin have not resolve barbara 's case of pneumonia , the pa prescribe another antibiotic , azithromycin , which target bacterial ribosome rather than peptidoglycan .
after take the azithromycin as direct , barbara 's symptom resolve and - pron - finally begin to feel like - pron - again .
presume no drug resistance to amoxicillin be involve , and give the effectiveness of azithromycin , the causative agent of barbara 's pneumonia be most likely mycoplasma pneumoniae .
even though this bacterium be a prokaryotic cell , - pron - be not inhibit by amoxicillin because - pron - do not have a cell wall and , therefore , do not make peptidoglycan .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary three  .  one spontaneous generation

the theory of spontaneous generation state that life arise from nonlive matter .
- pron - be a long - hold belief date back to aristotle and the ancient greeks .

experimentation by francesco redi in the one  seven th century present the first significant evidence refute spontaneous generation by show that fly must have access to meat for maggot to develop on the meat .
prominent scientist design experiment and argue both in support of ( john needham ) and against ( lazzaro spallanzani ) spontaneous generation .

louis pasteur be credit with conclusively disprove the theory of spontaneous generation with - pron - famous swan - neck flask experiment .
- pron - subsequently propose that “ life only come from life .
"
three  .  two foundations of modern cell theory

although cell be first observe in the one  six  six  zero s by robert hooke , cell theory be not well accept for another two  zero  zero year .
the work of scientist such as schleiden , schwann , remak , and virchow contribute to - pron - acceptance .

endosymbiotic theory state that mitochondria and chloroplast , organelle find in many type of organism , have - pron - origin in bacteria .
significant structural and genetic information support this theory .

the miasma theory of disease be widely accept until the one  nine th century , when - pron - be replace by the germ theory of disease thank to the work of semmelweis , snow , pasteur , lister , and koch , and other .
three  .  three unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells  prokaryotic cell differ from eukaryotic cell in that - pron - genetic material be contain in a nucleoid rather than a membrane - bind nucleus .
in addition , prokaryotic cell generally lack membrane - bind organelle .
 prokaryotic cell of the same specie typically share a similar cell morphology and cellular arrangement .
 most prokaryotic cell have a cell wall that help the organism maintain cellular morphology and protect - pron - against change in osmotic pressure .

outside of the nucleoid , prokaryotic cell may contain extrachromosomal dna in plasmid .
 prokaryotic ribosome that be find in the cytoplasm have a size of seven  zero s . 
some prokaryotic cell have inclusion that store nutrient or chemical for other use .

some prokaryotic cell be able to form endospore through sporulation to survive in a dormant state when condition be unfavorable .
endospore can germinate , transform back into vegetative cell when condition improve .

in prokaryotic cell , the cell envelope include a plasma membrane and usually a cell wall .

bacterial membrane be compose of phospholipid with integral or peripheral protein .
the fatty acid clinical focus chapter three  the cell one  four  one component of these phospholipid be ester - link and be often use to identify specific type of bacteria .
the protein serve a variety of function , include transport , cell - to - cell communication , and sense environmental condition .
archaeal membrane be distinct in that - pron - be compose of fatty acid that be ether - link to phospholipid .

some molecule can move across the bacterial membrane by simple diffusion , but most large molecule must be actively transport through membrane structure use cellular energy .

prokaryotic cell wall may be compose of peptidoglycan ( bacteria ) or pseudopeptidoglycan ( archaea ) .
 gram - positive bacterial cell be characterize by a thick peptidoglycan layer , whereas gram - negative bacterial cell be characterize by a thin peptidoglycan layer surround by an outer membrane .

some prokaryotic cell produce glycocalyx coating , such as capsule and slime layer , that aid in attachment to surface and / or evasion of the host immune system .

some prokaryotic cell have fimbriae or pili , filamentous appendage that aid in attachment to surface .
pili be also use in the transfer of genetic material between cell .

some prokaryotic cell use one or more flagella to move through water .
peritrichous bacteria , which have numerous flagellum , use run and tumble to move purposefully in the direction of a chemical attractant .
three  .  four unique characteristics of eukaryotic cells  eukaryotic cell be define by the presence of a nucleus contain the dna genome and bind by a nuclear membrane ( or nuclear envelope ) compose of two lipid bilayer that regulate transport of material into and out of the nucleus through nuclear pore .
 eukaryotic cell morphology vary greatly and may be maintain by various structure , include the cytoskeleton , the cell membrane , and / or the cell wall

the nucleolus , locate in the nucleus of eukaryotic cell , be the site of ribosomal synthesis and the first stage of ribosome assembly .

eukaryotic cell contain eight  zero s ribosome in the rough endoplasmic reticulum ( membrane bind - ribosome ) and cytoplasm ( free ribosome ) .
- pron - contain seven  zero ribosome in mitochondria and chloroplast .
 eukaryotic cell have evolve an endomembrane system , contain membrane - bind organelle involve in transport .
these include vesicle , the endoplasmic reticulum , and the golgi apparatus .

the smooth endoplasmic reticulum play a role in lipid biosynthesis , carbohydrate metabolism , and detoxification of toxic compound .
the rough endoplasmic reticulum contain membrane - bind eight  zero s ribosome that synthesize protein destine for the cell membrane 
the golgi apparatus process protein and lipid , typically through the addition of sugar molecule , produce glycoprotein or glycolipid , component of the plasma membrane that be use in cell - to - cell communication .

lysosome contain digestive enzyme that break down small particle ingest by endocytosis , large particle or cell ingest by phagocytosis , and damage intracellular component .

the cytoskeleton , compose of microfilament , intermediate filament , and microtubule , provide structural support in eukaryotic cell and serve as a network for transport of intracellular material .

centrosomes be microtubule - organize center important in the formation of the mitotic spindle in mitosis .

mitochondria be the site of cellular respiration .
- pron - have two membrane  an outer membrane and an inner membrane with cristae .
the mitochondrial matrix , within the inner membrane , contain the mitochondrial dna , seven  zero s ribosome , and metabolic enzyme .

the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cell be structurally similar to that find in prokaryotic cell , and membrane component move accord to the fluid mosaic model .
however , eukaryotic membrane contain sterol , which alter membrane fluidity , as well as glycoprotein and glycolipid , which help the cell recognize other cell and infectious particle .

in addition to active transport and passive transport , eukaryotic cell membrane can take material into the cell via endocytosis , or expel matter from the cell via exocytosis .
one  four  two chapter three
 the cell
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  cell of fungi , algae , plant , and some protist have a cell wall , whereas cell of animal and some protozoan have a sticky extracellular matrix that provide structural support and mediate cellular signaling .

eukaryotic flagella be structurally distinct from prokaryotic flagellum but serve a similar purpose ( locomotion ) .
cilia be structurally similar to eukaryotic flagella , but short  - pron - may be use for locomotion , feeding , or movement of extracellular particle .
chapter four prokaryotic diversity figure four  .  one
the bacterium shewanella live in the deep sea , where there be little oxygen diffuse in the water .
- pron - be able to survive in this harsh environment by attach to the sea floor and use long appendage , call “ nanocable , " to sense oxygen .
( credit a  modification of work by nasa  credit b  modification of work by liza gross )
chapter outline four  .  one prokaryote habitats , relationships , and microbiomes four  .  two proteobacteria four  .  three nonproteobacteria gram - negative bacteria and phototrophic bacteria four  .  four gram - positive bacteria four  .  five deeply branching bacteria four  .  six
archaea introduction scientist have study prokaryote for century , but - pron - be not until one  nine  six  six that scientist thomas brock ( one  nine  two  six – ) discover that certain bacteria can live in boil water .
this lead many to wonder whether prokaryote may also live in other extreme environment , such as at the bottom of the ocean , at high altitude , or inside volcano , or even on other planet .
prokaryote have an important role in change , shaping , and sustain the entire biosphere .
- pron - can produce protein and other substance use by molecular biologist in basic research and in medicine and industry .
for example , the bacterium shewanella live in the deep sea , where oxygen be scarce .
- pron - grow long appendage , which have special sensor use to seek the limit oxygen in - pron - environment .
- pron - can also digest toxic waste and generate electricity .
other specie of prokaryote can produce more oxygen than the entire amazon rainforest , while still other supply plant , animal , and human with usable form of nitrogen  and inhabit - pron - body , protect - pron - from harmful microorganism and produce some vitally important substance .
this chapter will examine the diversity , structure , and function of prokaryote .
chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  four  nine four  .  one prokaryote habitats , relationships , and microbiomes learning objectives
 identify and describe unique example of prokaryote in various habitat on earth  identify and describe symbiotic relationship
 compare normal / commensal / resident microbiota to transient microbiota

explain how prokaryote be classify
all live organism be classify into three domain of life  archaea , bacteria , and eukarya .
in this chapter , - pron - will focus on the domain archaea and bacteria .
archaea and bacteria be unicellular prokaryotic organism .
unlike eukaryote , - pron - have no nucleus or any other membrane - bind organelle .
prokaryote habitats and functions prokaryotes be ubiquitous .
- pron - can be find everywhere on - pron - planet , even in hot spring , in the antarctic ice shield , and under extreme pressure two mile under water .
one bacterium , paracoccus denitrifican , have even be show to survive when scientist remove - pron - from - pron - native environment ( soil ) and use a centrifuge to subject - pron - to force of gravity as strong as those find on the surface of jupiter .
prokaryote also be abundant on and within the human body .
accord to a report by national institutes of health , prokaryote , especially bacteria , outnumber human cell one  zero   one  . [ one ] more recent study suggest the ratio could be close to one   one , but even that ratio mean that there be a great number of bacteria within the human body . [ two ]
bacteria thrive in the human mouth , nasal cavity , throat , ear , gastrointestinal tract , and vagina .
large colony of bacteria can be find on healthy human skin , especially in moist area ( armpit , navel , and area behind ear ) .
however , even dry area of the skin be not free from bacteria .
part one marsha , a two  zero  - year - old university student , recently return to the united states from a trip to nigeria , where - pron - have intern as a medical assistant for an organization work to improve access to laboratory service for tuberculosis testing .
when - pron - return , marsha begin to feel fatigue , which - pron - initially attribute to jet lag .
however , the fatigue persist , and marsha soon begin to experience other bothersome symptom , such as occasional coughing , night sweat , loss of appetite , and a low - grade fever of three  seven  .  four ° c ( nine  nine  .  three ° f ) .
marsha expect - pron - symptom would subside in a few day , but instead , - pron - gradually become more severe .
about two week after return home , - pron - cough up some sputum and notice that - pron - contain blood and small whitish clump resemble cottage cheese .
- pron - fever spike to three  eight  .  two ° c ( one  zero  zero  .  eight ° f ) , and - pron - begin feel sharp pain in - pron - chest when breathe deeply .
concerned that - pron - seem to be get bad , marsha schedule an appointment with - pron - physician .

could marsha 's symptom be relate to - pron - overseas travel , even several week after return home ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one .
medical press .
“
mouth bacteria can change - pron - diet , supercomputers reveal .
" august one  two , two  zero  one  four .
http / / medicalxpress . com / news /
two  zero  one  four  -  zero  eight  - mouth - bacteria - diet - supercomputers - reveal . html .
accessed february two  four , two  zero  one  five .
two . a . abbott .
"
scientist bust myth
that - pron - body have more bacteria than human cell  decade - old assumption about microbiota revisited .
”
nature .
http / / www . nature . com / news / scientists - bust - myth - that - our - bodies - have - more - bacteria - than - human - cells -  one  .  one  nine  one  three  six .
accessed june three , two  zero  one  six .
one  five  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the existence of prokaryote be very important for the stability and thriving of ecosystem .
for example , - pron - be a necessary part of soil formation and stabilization process through the breakdown of organic matter and development of biofilm .
one gram of soil contain up to one  zero billion microorganism ( most of - pron - prokaryotic ) belong to about one  ,  zero  zero  zero specie .
many specie of bacteria use substance release from plant root , such as acid and carbohydrate , as nutrient .
the bacteria metabolize these plant substance and release the product of bacterial metabolism back to the soil , form humus and thus increase the soil 's fertility .
in salty lake such as the dead sea ( figure four  .  two ) , salt - love halobacteria decompose dead brine shrimp and nourish young brine shrimp and fly with the product of bacterial metabolism .
figure four  .  two ( a )
some prokaryote , call halophile , can thrive in extremely salty environment such as the dead sea , picture here .
( b )
the archaeon halobacterium salinarum , show here in an electron micrograph , be a halophile that live in the dead sea .
( credit a  modification of work by jullen menichini  credit b  modification of work by nasa )
in addition to live in the ground and the water , prokaryotic microorganism be abundant in the air , even high in the atmosphere .
there may be up to two  ,  zero  zero  zero different kind of bacteria in the air , similar to - pron - diversity in the soil .
prokaryote can be find everywhere on earth because - pron - be extremely resilient and adaptable .
- pron - be often metabolically flexible , which mean that - pron - may easily switch from one energy source to another , depend on the availability of the source , or from one metabolic pathway to another .
for example , certain prokaryotic cyanobacteria can switch from a conventional type of lipid metabolism , which include production of fatty aldehyde , to a different type of lipid metabolism that generate biofuel , such as fatty acid and wax ester .
groundwater bacteria store complex high - energy carbohydrate when grow in pure groundwater , but - pron - metabolize these molecule when the groundwater be enrich with phosphate .
some bacteria get - pron - energy by reduce sulfate into sulfide , but can switch to a different metabolic pathway when necessary , produce acid and free hydrogen ion .
prokaryote perform function vital to life on earth by capturing ( or " fix " ) and recycle element like carbon and nitrogen .
organism such as animal require organic carbon to grow , but , unlike prokaryote , - pron - be unable to use inorganic carbon source like carbon dioxide .
thus , animal rely on prokaryote to convert carbon dioxide into organic carbon product that - pron - can use .
this process of convert carbon dioxide to organic carbon product be call carbon fixation .
plant and animal also rely heavily on prokaryote for nitrogen fixation , the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia , a compound that some plant can use to form many different biomolecule necessary to - pron - survival .
bacteria in the genus rhizobium , for example , be nitrogen - fix bacteria  - pron - live in the root of legume plant such as clover , alfalfa , and pea ( figure four  .  three ) .
ammonia produce by rhizobium help these plant to survive by enable - pron - to make building block of nucleic acid .
in turn , these plant may be eat by animal - sustain - pron - growth and survival - or - pron - may die , in which case the product of nitrogen fixation will enrich the soil and be use by other plant .
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  five  one figure four  .  three ( a ) nitrogen - fix bacteria such as rhizobium live in the root nodule of legume such as clover .
( b )
this micrograph of the root nodule show bacteroid ( bacterium - like cell or modify bacterial cell ) within the plant cell .
the bacteroid be visible as dark oval within the large plant cell .
( credit a  modification of work by usda )
another positive function of prokaryote be in clean up the environment .
recently , some researcher focus on the diversity and function of prokaryote in manmade environment .
- pron - find that some bacteria play a unique role in degrade toxic chemical that pollute water and soil . [ three ]
despite all of the positive and helpful role prokaryote play , some be human pathogen that may cause illness or infection when - pron - enter the body .
in addition , some bacteria can contaminate food , cause spoilage or foodborne illness , which make - pron - subject of concern in food preparation and safety .
less than one % of prokaryote ( all of - pron - bacteria ) be think to be human pathogen , but collectively these specie be responsible for a large number of the disease that afflict human .
besides pathogen , which have a direct impact on human health , prokaryote also affect human in many indirect way .
for example , prokaryote be now think to be key player in the process of climate change .
in recent year , as temperature in the earth
's polar region have rise , soil that be formerly freeze year - round ( permafrost ) have begin to thaw .
carbon trap in the permafrost be gradually release and metabolize by prokaryote .
this produce massive amount of carbon dioxide and methane , greenhouse gas that escape into the atmosphere and contribute to the greenhouse effect .

in what type of environment can prokaryote be find ?

name some way that plant and animal rely on prokaryote .
symbiotic relationships
as - pron - have learn , prokaryotic microorganism can associate with plant and animal .
often , this association result in unique relationship between organism .
for example , bacteria live on the root or leaf of a plant get nutrient from the plant and , in return , produce substance that protect the plant from pathogen .
on the other hand , some bacteria be plant pathogen that use mechanism of infection similar to bacterial pathogen of animal and human .
prokaryote live in a community , or a group of interact population of organism .
a population be a group of individual organism belong to the same biological specie and limit to a certain geographic area .
population three .
a . m .
kravetz “ unique bacteria fights man - make chemical waste .
" two  zero  one  two .
http / / www . livescience . com /  two  five  one  eight  one  - bacteria - strain - clean - uptoxins -
nsf - bts . html .
accessed march nine , two  zero  one  five .
one  five  two chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five can have cooperative interaction , which benefit the population , or competitive interaction , in which one population compete with another for resource .
the study of these interaction between microbial population and - pron - environment be call microbial ecology .
any interaction between different specie that be associate with each other within a community be call symbiosis .
such interaction fall along a continuum between opposition and cooperation .
interaction in a symbiotic relationship may be beneficial or harmful , or have no effect on one or both of the specie involve .
table four  .  one summarize the main type of symbiotic interaction among prokaryote .
type of symbiotic relationships type population
a population b mutualism benefitted
benefitted amensalism harmed
unaffected commensalism
benefitted
unaffected
neutralism unaffected unaffected parasitism
benefitted harmed table four  .  one
when two specie benefit from each other , the symbiosis be call mutualism ( or syntropy , or crossfeeding ) .
for example , human have a mutualistic relationship with the bacterium bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , which live in the intestinal tract .
bacteroide thetaiotaomicron digest complex polysaccharide plant material that human digestive enzyme can not break down , convert - pron - into monosaccharide that can be absorb by human cell .
human also have a mutualistic relationship with certain strain of escherichia coli , another bacterium find in the gut .
e . coli relie on intestinal content for nutrient , and human derive certain vitamin from e . coli , particularly vitamin k , which be require for the formation of blood clotting factor .
( this be only true for some strain of e . coli , however .
other strain be pathogenic and do not have a mutualistic relationship with human . )
a type of symbiosis in which one population harm another but remain unaffected - pron - be call amensalism .
in the case of bacteria , some amensalist specie produce bactericidal substance that kill other specie of bacteria .
the microbiota of the skin be compose of a variety of bacterial specie , include staphylococcus epidermidis and propionibacterium acne .
although both specie have the potential to cause infectious disease when protective barrier be breach , - pron - both produce a variety of antibacterial bacteriocin and bacteriocin - like compound .
s . epidermidis and p . acne be unaffected by the bacteriocin and bacteriocin - like compound - pron - produce , but these compound can target and kill other potential pathogen .
in another type of symbiosis , call commensalism , one organism benefit while the other be unaffected .
this occur when the bacterium staphylococcus epidermidis use the dead cell of the human skin as nutrient .
billion of these bacteria live on - pron - skin , but in most case ( especially when - pron - immune system be healthy ) , - pron - do not react to - pron - in any way .
s . epidermidis provide an excellent example of how the classification of symbiotic relationship be not always distinct .
one could also consider the symbiotic relationship of s . epidermidis with human as mutualism .
human provide a food source of dead skin cell to the bacterium , and in turn the production of bacteriocin can provide an defense against potential pathogen .
if neither of the symbiotic organism be affect in any way , - pron - call this type of symbiosis neutralism .
an example of neutralism be the coexistence of metabolically active ( vegetate ) bacteria and endospore ( dormant , metabolically passive bacteria ) .
for example , the bacterium bacillus anthracis typically form endospore in soil when condition be unfavorable .
if the soil be warm and enrich with nutrient , some b . anthracis endospore germinate and remain in symbiosis with other specie of endospore that have not germinate .
a type of symbiosis in which one organism benefit while harm the other be call parasitism .
the relationship chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  five  three between human and many pathogenic prokaryote can be characterize as parasitic because these organism invade the body , produce toxic substance or infectious disease that cause harm .
disease such as tetanus , diphtheria , pertussis , tuberculosis , and leprosy all arise from interaction between bacteria and human .
scientist have coin the term microbiome to refer to all prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganism that be associate with a certain organism or environment .
within the human microbiome , there be resident microbiota and transient microbiota .
the resident microbiota consist of microorganism that constantly live in or on - pron - body .
the term transient microbiota refer to microorganism that be only temporarily find in the human body , and these may include pathogenic microorganism .
hygiene and diet can alter both the resident and transient microbiota .
the resident microbiota be amazingly diverse , not only in term of the variety of specie but also in term of the preference of different microorganism for different area of the human body .
for example , in the human mouth , there be thousand of commensal or mutualistic specie of bacteria .
some of these bacteria prefer to inhabit the surface of the tongue , whereas other prefer the internal surface of the cheek , and yet other prefer the front or back tooth or gum .
the inner surface of the cheek have the least diverse microbiota because of - pron - exposure to oxygen .
by contrast , the crypt of the tongue and the space between tooth be two site with limited oxygen exposure , so these site have more diverse microbiota , include bacteria live in the absence of oxygen ( e . g . , bacteroides , fusobacterium ) .
difference in the oral microbiota between randomly choose human individual be also significant .
study have show , for example , that the prevalence of such bacteria as streptococcus , haemophilus , neisseria , and other be dramatically different when compare between individuals . [ four ]
there be also significant difference between the microbiota of different site of the same human body .
the inner surface of the cheek have a predominance of streptococcus , whereas in the throat , the palatine tonsil , and saliva , there be two to three time few streptococcus , and several time more fusobacterium .
in the plaque remove from gum , the predominant bacteria belong to the genus fusobacterium .
however , in the intestine , both streptococcus and fusobacterium disappear , and the genus bacteroides become predominant .
not only can the microbiota vary from one body site to another , the microbiome can also change over time within the same individual .
human acquire - pron - first inoculation of normal flora during natural birth and shortly after birth .
before birth , there be a rapid increase in the population of lactobacillus spp .
in the vagina , and this population serve as the first colonization of microbiota during natural birth .
after birth , additional microbe be acquire from healthcare provider , parent , other relative , and individual who come in contact with the baby .
this process establish a microbiome that will continue to evolve over the course of the individual 's life as new microbe colonize and be eliminate from the body .
for example , - pron - be estimate that within a nine  - hour period , the microbiota of the small intestine can change so that half of the microbial inhabitant will be different . [ five ]
the importance of the initial lactobacillus colonization during vaginal child birth be highlight by study demonstrate a high incidence of disease in individual bear by cesarean section , compare to those bear vaginally .
study have show that baby bear vaginally be predominantly colonize by vaginal lactobacillus , whereas baby bear by cesarean section be more frequently colonize by microbe of the normal skin microbiota , include common hospital - acquire pathogen .
throughout the body , resident microbiota be important for human health because - pron - occupy niche that may be otherwise take by pathogenic microorganism .
for instance , lactobacillus spp .
be the dominant bacterial specie of the normal vaginal microbiota for most woman .
lactobacillus produce lactic acid , contribute to the acidity of the vagina and inhibit the growth of pathogenic yeast .
however , when the population of the resident microbiota be decrease for some reason ( e . g . , because of take antibiotic ) , the ph of the vagina increase , make - pron - a more favorable environment for the growth of yeast such as candida albican .
antibiotic therapy can also disrupt the microbiota of the intestinal tract and respiratory tract , increase the risk for secondary infection and / or promote the long - term carriage and shedding of pathogen .
four .
e . m .
bik et al .
“
bacterial diversity in the oral cavity of one  zero healthy individuals .
"
the isme journal four no .
eight ( two  zero  one  zero  )  nine  six  two – nine  seven  four . five .
c . c . booijink et al .
“
high temporal and intra - individual
variation detected in the human ileal microbiota .
" environmental microbiology one  two
no . one  two ( two  zero  one  zero  )  three  two  one  three – three  two  two  seven . one  five  four chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 explain the difference between cooperative and competitive interaction in microbial community .

list the type of symbiosis and explain how each population be affect .
taxonomy and systematics assigning prokaryote to a certain species be challenging .
- pron - do not reproduce sexually , so - pron - be not possible to classify - pron - accord to the presence or absence of interbreed .
also , - pron - do not have many morphological feature .
traditionally , the classification of prokaryote be base on - pron - shape , stain pattern , and biochemical or physiological difference .
more recently , as technology have improve , the nucleotide sequence in gene have become an important criterion of microbial classification .
in one  nine  two  three , american microbiologist david hendricks bergey ( one  eight  six  zero – one  nine  three  seven ) publish a manual in determinative bacteriology .
with this manual , - pron - attempt to summarize the information about the kind of bacteria know at that time , use latin binomial classification .
bergey also include the morphological , physiological , and biochemical property of these organism .
- pron - manual have be update multiple time to include new bacteria and - pron - property .
- pron - be a great aid in bacterial taxonomy and method of characterization of bacteria .
a more recent sister publication , the five - volume bergey 's manual of systematic bacteriology , expand on bergey 's original manual .
- pron - include a large number of additional specie , along with up - to - date description of the taxonomy and biological property of all name prokaryotic taxa .
this publication incorporate the approve name of bacteria as determine by the list of prokaryotic names with stand in nomenclature ( lpsn ) .
bergey 's manual of determinative bacteriology be now available ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two mandeterbact ) online .
- pron - can also access a searchable database ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two databmicrefst ) of microbial reference strain , publish by the american type culture collection ( atcc ) .
classification by staining patterns
accord to - pron - staining pattern , which depend on the property of - pron - cell wall , bacteria have traditionally be classify into gram - positive , gram - negative , and " atypical , " mean neither gram - positive nor gram - negative .
as explain in staining microscopic specimens , gram - positive bacteria possess a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that retain the primary stain ( crystal violet ) during the decolorizing step  - pron - remain purple after the gramstain procedure because the crystal violet dominate the light red / pink color of the secondary counterstain , safranin .
in contrast , gram - negative bacteria possess a thin peptidoglycan cell wall that do not prevent the crystal violet from wash away during the decolorizing step  therefore , - pron - appear light red / pink after stain with the safranin .
bacteria that can not be stain by the standard gram stain procedure be call atypical bacteria .
include in the atypical category be specie of mycoplasma and chlamydia .
rickettsia be also consider atypical because - pron - be too small to be evaluate by the gram stain .
more recently , scientist have begin to further classify gram - negative and gram - positive bacteria .
- pron - have add a special group of deeply branch bacteria base on a combination of physiological , biochemical , and genetic feature .
- pron - also now further classify gram - negative bacteria into proteobacteria , cytophaga - flavobacterium - bacteroides ( cfb ) , and spirochete .
the deeply branch bacteria be think to be a very early evolutionary form of bacteria ( see deeply branching link to learn chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  five  five bacteria ) .
- pron - live in hot , acidic , ultraviolet - light - expose , and anaerobic ( deprive of oxygen ) condition .
proteobacteria be a phylum of very diverse group of gram - negative bacteria  - pron - include some important human pathogen ( e . g . , e . coli and bordetella pertussis ) .
the cfb group of bacteria include component of the normal human gut microbiota , like bacteroides .
the spirochete be spiral - shape bacteria and include the pathogen treponema pallidum , which cause syphilis .
- pron - will characterize these group of bacteria in more detail later in the chapter .
base on - pron - prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotide , gram - positive bacteria be also classify into low g+c and high g+c gram - positive bacteria .
the low g+c gram - positive bacteria have less than five  zero % of guanine and cytosine nucleotide in - pron - dna .
- pron - include human pathogen , such as those that cause anthrax ( bacillus anthracis ) , tetanus ( clostridium tetani ) , and listeriosis ( listeria monocytogene ) .
high g+c gram - positive bacteria , which have more than five  zero % guanine and cytosine nucleotide in - pron - dna , include the bacteria that cause diphtheria ( corynebacterium diphtheriae ) , tuberculosis ( mycobacterium tuberculosis ) , and other disease .
the classification of prokaryote be constantly change as new specie be be discover .
- pron - will describe - pron - in more detail , along with the disease - pron - cause , in later section and chapter .

how do scientist classify prokaryote ?
human microbiome project
the human microbiome project be launch by the national institutes of health ( nih ) in two  zero  zero  eight .
one main goal of the project be to create a large repository of the gene sequence of important microbe find in human , help biologist and clinician understand the dynamic of the human microbiome and the relationship between the human microbiota and disease .
a network of lab work together have be compile the datum from swab of several area of the skin , gut , and mouth from hundred of individual .
one of the challenge in understand the human microbiome have be the difficulty of culture many of the microbe that inhabit the human body .
- pron - have be estimate that - pron - be only able to culture one % of the bacteria in nature and that - pron - be unable to grow the remain nine  nine % .
to address this challenge , researcher have use metagenomic analysis , which study genetic material harvest directly from microbial community , as oppose to that of individual specie grow in a culture .
this allow researcher to study the genetic material of all microbe in the microbiome , rather than just those that can be cultured . [ six ]
one important achievement of the human microbiome project be establish the first reference database on microorganism live in and on the human body .
many of the microbe in the microbiome be beneficial , but some be not .
- pron - be find , somewhat unexpectedly , that all of - pron - have some serious microbial pathogen in - pron - microbiota .
for example , the conjunctiva of the human eye contain two  four genera of bacteria and numerous pathogenic species . [ seven ]
a healthy human mouth contain a number of specie of the genus streptococcus , include pathogenic specie s . pyogene and s . pneumoniae . [ eight ]
this raise the question of why certain prokaryotic organism exist commensally in certain individual but act as deadly pathogen in other .
also unexpected be the number of organism that have never be culture .
for example , in one metagenomic study of the human gut microbiota , one  seven  four new specie of bacteria be identified . [ nine ]
another goal for the near future be to characterize the human microbiota in patient with different disease and to find out whether there be any relationship between the content of an individual 's microbiota and risk for or susceptibility to specific disease .
analyze the microbiome in a person with a specific disease may reveal new way to fight disease .
micro connections one  five  six chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five four  .  two proteobacteria learning objectives
 describe the unique feature of each class within the phylum proteobacteria  alphaproteobacteria , betaproteobacteria , gammaproteobacteria , deltaproteobacteria , and epsilonproteobacteria
 give an example of a bacterium in each class of proteobacteria
in one  nine  eight  seven , the american microbiologist carl woese ( one  nine  two  eight – two  zero  one  two ) suggest that a large and diverse group of bacteria that - pron - call " purple bacteria and - pron - relative " should be define as a separate phylum within the domain bacteria base on the similarity of the nucleotide sequence in - pron - genome . [ one  zero ]
this phylum of gram - negative bacteria subsequently receive the name proteobacteria .
- pron - include many bacteria that be part of the normal human microbiota as well as many pathogen .
the proteobacteria be further divide into five class  alphaproteobacteria , betaproteobacteria , gammaproteobacteria , deltaproteobacteria , and epsilonproteobacteria ( appendix d ) .
alphaproteobacteria
the first class of proteobacteria be the alphaproteobacteria .
the unifying characteristic of this class be that - pron - be oligotroph , organism capable of live in low - nutrient environment such as deep oceanic sediment , glacial ice , or deep undersurface soil .
among the alphaproteobacteria be two taxa , chlamydia and rickettsia , that be obligate intracellular pathogen , mean that part of - pron - life cycle must occur inside other cell call host cell .
when not grow inside a host cell , chlamydia and rickettsia be metabolically inactive outside of the host cell .
- pron - can not synthesize - pron - own adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) , and , therefore , rely on cell for - pron - energy need .
rickettsia spp . include a number of serious human pathogen .
for example , r . rickettsii cause rocky mountain spot fever , a life - threaten form of meningoencephalitis ( inflammation of the membrane that wrap the brain ) .
r . rickettsii infect tick and can be transmit to human via a bite from an infect tick ( figure four  .  four ) .
six .
national institutes of health .
“
human microbiome project .
overview .
"
http / / commonfund . nih . gov / hmp / overview .
accessed june seven , two  zero  one  six .
seven .
q . dong et al .
“
diversity of bacteria at healthy human conjunctiva .
" investigative ophthalmology and visual science five  two
no .
eight ( two  zero  one  one  )  five  four  zero  eight – five  four  one  three .
eight .
f . e .
dewhirst et al .
"
the human oral microbiome .
” journal of bacteriology one  nine  two
no .
one  nine
( two  zero  one  zero  )  five  zero  zero  two – five  zero  one  seven .
nine .
j . c . lagier et al .
“
microbial culturomics 
paradigm shift in the human gut microbiome study .
" clinical microbiology and infection one  eight
no . one  two ( two  zero  one  two  )  one  one  eight  five – one  one  nine  three . one  zero .
c . r . woese .
“ bacterial evolution .
" microbiological review five  one
no . two
( one  nine  eight  seven  )  two  two  one – two  seven  one . chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  five  seven figure four  .  four rickettsia require special staining method to see - pron - under a microscope .
here , r . rickettsii , which cause rocky mountain spot fever , be show infect the cell of a tick .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
another species of rickettsia , r . prowazekii , be spread by lice .
- pron - cause epidemic typhus , a severe infectious disease common during warfare and mass migration of people .
r . prowazekii infect human endothelium cell , cause inflammation of the inner lining of blood vessel , high fever , abdominal pain , and sometimes delirium .
a relative , r . typhi , cause a less severe disease know as murine or endemic typhus , which be still observe in the southwestern united states during warm season .
chlamydia be another taxon of the alphaproteobacteria .
member of this genus be gram - negative , obligate intracellular pathogen that be extremely resistant to the cellular defense , give - pron - the ability to spread from host to host rapidly via elementary body .
the metabolically and reproductively inactive elementary body be the endospore - like form of intracellular bacteria that enter an epithelial cell , where - pron - become active .
figure four  .  five illustrate the life cycle of chlamydia .
c . trachomatis be a human pathogen that cause trachoma , a disease of the eye , often lead to blindness .
c . trachomatis also cause the sexually transmit disease lymphogranuloma venereum ( lgv ) .
this disease be often mildly symptomatic , manifest as regional lymph node swelling , or - pron - may be asymptomatic , but - pron - be extremely contagious and be common on college campus .
table four  .  two summarize the characteristic of important genera of alphaproteobacteria .
one  five  eight chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  five chlamydia begin infection of a host when the metabolically inactive elementary body enter an epithelial cell .
once inside the host cell , the elementary body turn into active reticulate body .
the reticulate body multiply and release more elementary body when the cell die after the chlamydia use all of the host cell 's atp .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
class alphaproteobacteria genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics agrobacterium gram - negative bacillus plant pathogen  one species , a . tumefacien , cause tumor in plant bartonella gram - negative , pleomorphic , flagellate coccobacillus facultative intracellular bacteria , transmit by lice and flea , cause trench fever and cat scratch disease in human
brucella gram - negative , small , flagellated coccobacillus facultative intracellular bacteria , transmit by contaminate milk from infect cow , cause brucellosis in cattle and human caulobacter gram - negative bacillus use in study on cellular adaptation and differentiation because of - pron - peculiar life cycle ( during cell division , form “ swarm " cell and " stalk " cell ) table four  .  two chapter four

prokaryotic diversity one  five  nine class alphaproteobacteria genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics chlamydia gram - negative , coccoid or ovoid bacterium obligatory intracellular bacteria  some cause chlamydia , trachoma , and pneumonia coxiella small , gram - negative bacillus obligatory intracellular bacteria  cause q fever  potential for use as biological weapon
ehrlichia very small , gramnegative , coccoid or ovoid bacteria obligatory intracellular bacteria  can be transport from cell to cell  transmit by tick  cause ehrlichiosis ( destruction of white blood cell and inflammation ) in human and dog hyphomicrobium gram - negative bacilli  grow from a stalk similar to
caulobacter methylocystis gram - negative , coccoid or short bacilli nitrogen - fix aerobic bacteria rhizobium gram - negative , rectangular bacilli with rounded end form cluster nitrogen - fix bacteria that live in soil and form symbiotic relationship with root of legume ( e . g . , clover , alfalfa , and bean )
rickettsia gram - negative , highly pleomorphic bacteria ( may be cocci , rod , or thread )
obligate intracellular bacteria  transmit by tick  may cause rocky mountain spot fever and typhus table four  .  two 
what characteristic do all alphaproteobacteria share ?
betaproteobacteria unlike alphaproteobacteria , which survive on a minimal amount of nutrient , the class betaproteobacteria be eutroph ( or copiotroph ) , mean that - pron - require a copious amount of organic nutrient .
betaproteobacteria often grow between aerobic and anaerobic area ( e . g . , in mammalian intestine ) .
some genera include specie that be human pathogen , able to cause severe , sometimes life - threaten disease .
the genus neisseria , for example , include the bacteria n . gonorrhoeae , the causative agent of the sti gonorrhea , and n . meningitide , the causative agent of bacterial meningitis .
neisseria be cocci that live on mucosal surface of the human body .
- pron - be fastidious , or difficult to culture , and - pron - require high level of moisture , nutrient supplement , and carbon dioxide .
also , neisseria be microaerophilic , mean that - pron - require low level of oxygen .
for optimal growth and for the purpose of identification , neisseria spp .
be grow on chocolate agar ( i . e . , agar supplement by partially hemolyze red blood cell ) .
- pron - characteristic pattern of growth in culture be diplococcal  pair of cell resemble coffee bean ( figure four  .  six ) .
one  six  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  six neisseria meningitidis grow in colony on a chocolate agar plate .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
the pathogen responsible for pertussis ( whooping cough ) be also a member of betaproteobacteria .
the bacterium bordetella pertussis , from the order burkholderiales , produce several toxin that paralyze the movement of cilia in the human respiratory tract and directly damage cell of the respiratory tract , cause a severe cough .
table four  .  three summarize the characteristic of important genera of betaproteobacteria .
class betaproteobacteria example genus microscopic morphology
unique characteristics bordetella a small , gram - negative coccobacillus
aerobic , very fastidious  b . pertussis cause pertussis ( whooping cough )
burkholderia gram - negative bacillus aerobic , aquatic , cause disease in horse and human ( especially patient with cystic fibrosis )  agent of nosocomial infection leptothrix gram - negative , sheathe , filamentous bacillus aquatic  oxidize iron and manganese  can live in wastewater treatment plant and clog pipe neisseria gram - negative , coffee bean - shape coccus form pair require moisture and high concentration of carbon dioxide  oxidase positive , grow on chocolate agar  pathogenic specie cause gonorrhea and meningitis thiobacillus gram - negative bacillus thermophilic , acidophilic , strictly aerobic bacteria  oxidize iron and sulfur table four  .  three

what characteristic do all betaproteobacteria share ?
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  six  one
part two
when marsha finally go to the doctor 's office , the physician listen to - pron - breathing through a stethoscope .
- pron - hear some crepitation ( a crackling sound ) in - pron - lung , so - pron - order a chest radiograph and ask the nurse to collect a sputum sample for microbiological evaluation and cytology .
the radiologic evaluation find cavity , opacity , and a particular pattern of distribution of abnormal material ( figure four  .  seven ) .

what be some possible disease that could be responsible for marsha 's radiograph result ?
figure four  .  seven
this anteroposterior radiograph show the presence of bilateral pulmonary infiltrate ( white triangle ) and “ caving formation
" ( black arrow ) present in the right apical region .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
gammaproteobacteria
the most diverse class of gram - negative bacteria be gammaproteobacteria , and - pron - include a number of human pathogen .
for example , a large and diverse family , pseudomonaceae , include the genus pseudomonas .
within this genus be the specie p . aeruginosa , a pathogen responsible for diverse infection in various region of the body .
p . aeruginosa be a strictly aerobic , nonfermente , highly motile bacterium .
- pron - often infect wound and burn , can be the cause of chronic urinary tract infection , and can be an important cause of respiratory infection in patient with cystic fibrosis or patient on mechanical ventilator .
infection by p . aeruginosa be often difficult to treat because the bacterium be resistant to many antibiotic and have a remarkable ability to form biofilm .
other representative of pseudomonas include the fluorescent ( glowing ) bacterium p . fluorescen and the soil bacteria p . putida , which be know for - pron - ability to degrade xenobiotic ( substance not naturally produce or find in live organism ) .
the pasteurellaceae also include several clinically relevant genera and specie .
this family include several bacteria that be human and / or animal pathogen .
for example , pasteurella haemolytica cause severe pneumonia in sheep and goat .
p . multocida be a specie that can be transmit from animal to human through bite , cause infection of the skin and deep tissue .
the genus haemophilus contain two human pathogen , h . influenzae and h . ducreyi .
despite - pron - name , h . influenzae do not cause influenza ( which be a viral disease ) .
h . influenzae can cause both upper and low respiratory tract infection , include sinusitis , bronchitis , ear infection , and pneumonia .
before the development of effective vaccination , strain of h . influenzae be a lead cause of more invasive disease , like meningitis in child .
h . ducreyi cause the sti know as chancroid .
the order vibrionales include the human pathogen vibrio cholerae .
this comma - shape aquatic bacterium thrive clinical focus one  six  two chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five in highly alkaline environment like shallow lagoon and sea port .
a toxin produce by v . cholerae cause hypersecretion of electrolyte and water in the large intestine , lead to profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration .
v . parahaemolyticus be also a cause of gastrointestinal disease in human , whereas v . vulnificus cause serious and potentially life - threaten cellulitis ( infection of the skin and deep tissue ) and blood - bear infection .
another representative of vibrionales , aliivibrio fischeri , engage in a symbiotic relationship with squid .
the squid provide nutrient for the bacteria to grow and the bacteria produce bioluminescence that protect the squid from predator ( figure four  .  eight ) .
figure four  .  eight ( a )
aliivibrio fischeri be a bioluminescent bacterium .
( b ) a . fischeri colonize and live in a mutualistic relationship with the hawaiian bobtail squid ( euprymna scolope ) .
( credit a  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit b  modification of work by margaret mcfall - ngai )
the genus legionella also belong to the gammaproteobacteria .
l . pneumophila , the pathogen responsible for legionnaires disease , be an aquatic bacterium that tend to inhabit pool of warm water , such as those find in the tank of air conditioning unit in large building ( figure four  .  nine ) .
because the bacteria can spread in aerosol , outbreak of legionnaires disease often affect resident of a building in which the water have become contaminate with legionella .
in fact , these bacteria derive - pron - name from the first know outbreak of legionnaires disease , which occur in a hotel host an american legion veteran ' association convention in philadelphia in one  nine  seven  six .
figure four  .  nine ( a )
legionella pneumophila , the causative agent of legionnaires disease , thrive in warm water .
( b ) outbreak of legionnaires disease often originate in the air condition unit of large building when water in or near the system become contaminate with l . pneumophila .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
enterobacteriaceae be a large family of enteric ( intestinal ) bacteria belong to the gammaproteobacteria .
- pron - be facultative anaerobe and be able to ferment carbohydrate .
within this family , microbiologist recognize two distinct category .
the first category be call the coliform , after - pron - prototypical bacterium specie , escherichia coli .
coliform be able to ferment lactose completely ( i . e . , with the production of acid and gas ) .
the second category , chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity
one  six  three noncoliform , either can not ferment lactose or can only ferment - pron - incompletely ( produce either acid or gas , but not both ) .
the noncoliform include some notable human pathogen , such as salmonella spp .
, shigella spp . , and yersinia pestis .
e . coli have be perhaps the most studied bacterium since - pron - be first describe in one  eight  eight  six by theodor escherich ( one  eight  five  seven – one  nine  one  one ) .
many strain of e . coli be in mutualistic relationship with human .
however , some strain produce a potentially deadly toxin call shiga toxin .
shiga toxin be one of the most potent bacterial toxin identify .
upon enter target cell , shiga toxin interact with ribosome , stop protein synthesis .
lack of protein synthesis lead to cellular death and hemorrhagic colitis , characterize by inflammation of intestinal tract and bloody diarrhea .
in the most severe case , patient can develop a deadly hemolytic uremic syndrome .
other e . coli strain may cause traveler 's diarrhea , a less severe but very widespread disease .
the genus salmonella , which belong to the noncoliform group of enterobacteriaceae , be interesting in that there be still no consensus about how many specie - pron - include .
scientist have reclassify many of the group - pron - once think to be specie as serotype ( also call serovar ) , which be strain or variation of the same specie of bacteria .
- pron - classification be base on pattern of reactivity by animal antisera against molecule on the surface of the bacterial cell .
a number of serotype of salmonella can cause salmonellosis , characterize by inflammation of the small and the large intestine , accompany by fever , vomiting , and diarrhea .
the specie s . enterobacterica ( serovar typhi ) cause typhoid fever , with symptom include fever , abdominal pain , and skin rash ( figure four  .  one  zero ) .
figure four  .  one  zero salmonella typhi be the causative agent of typhoid fever .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention ) table four  .  four summarize the characteristic of important genera of gammaproteobacteria .
class gammaproteobacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics beggiatoa gram - negative bacteria  disc - shape or cylindrical aquatic , live in water with high content of hydrogen disulfide  can cause problem for sewage treatment enterobacter gram - negative bacillus facultative anaerobe  cause urinary and respiratory tract infection in hospitalized patient  implicate in the pathogenesis of obesity erwinia gram - negative bacillus plant pathogen cause leaf spot and discoloration  may digest cellulose  prefer relatively low temperature ( two  five – three  zero ° c ) table
four  .  four one  six  four chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five class gammaproteobacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics escherichia gram - negative bacillus facultative anaerobe  inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of warmblooded animal  some strain be mutualist , produce vitamin k  other , like serotype e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven , be pathogen  e . coli have be a model organism for many study in genetic and molecular biology hemophilus gram - negative bacillus pleomorphic , may appear as coccobacillus , aerobe , or facultative anaerobe  grow on blood agar  pathogenic specie can cause respiratory infection , chancroid , and other disease klebsiella gram - negative bacillus  appear rounder and thick than other member of enterobacteriaceae facultative anaerobe , encapsulate , nonmotile  pathogenic specie may cause pneumonia , especially in people with alcoholism
legionella gram - negative bacillus fastidious , grow on charcoal - buffer yeast extract  l . pneumophila cause legionnaires disease methylomonas gram - negative bacillus use methane as source of carbon and energy proteus gram - negative bacillus ( pleomorphic )
common inhabitant of the human gastrointestinal tract  motile  produce urease  opportunistic pathogen  may cause urinary tract infection and sepsis pseudomonas gram - negative bacillus aerobic  versatile  produce yellow and blue pigment , make - pron - appear green in culture  opportunistic , antibiotic - resistant pathogen may cause wound infection , hospital - acquire infection , and secondary infection in patient with cystic fibrosis serratia gram - negative bacillus motile  may produce red pigment  opportunistic pathogen responsible for a large number of hospital - acquire infection shigella gram - negative bacillus nonmotile  dangerously pathogenic  produce shiga toxin , which can destroy cell of the gastrointestinal tract  can cause dysentery vibrio gram - negative , comma - or curve rod - shape bacteria inhabit seawater  flagellate , motile  may produce toxin that cause hypersecretion of water and electrolyte in the gastrointestinal tract  some specie may cause serious wound infection yersinia gram - negative bacillus carry by rodent  human pathogen  y . pestis cause bubonic plague and pneumonic plague  y . enterocolitica can be a pathogen cause diarrhea in human table four  .  four  list two family of gammaproteobacteria .
deltaproteobacteria
the deltaproteobacteria be a small class of gram - negative proteobacteria that include sulfate - reduce bacteria chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  six  five ( srbs ) , so name because - pron - use sulfate as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain .
few srb be pathogenic .
however , the srb desulfovibrio orale be associate with periodontal disease ( disease of the gums ) .
deltaproteobacteria also include the genus bdellovibrio , specie of which be parasite of other gram - negative bacteria .
bdellovibrio invade the cell of the host bacterium , position - pron - in the periplasm , the space between the plasma membrane and the cell wall , feed on the host 's protein and polysaccharide .
the infection be lethal for the host cell .
another type of deltaproteobacteria , myxobacteria , live in the soil , scavenge inorganic compound .
motile and highly social , - pron - interact with other bacteria within and outside - pron - own group .
- pron - can form multicellular , macroscopic “ fruiting body "
( figure four  .  one  one ) , structure that be still be study by biologist and bacterial ecologists . [ one  one ]
these bacteria can also form metabolically inactive myxospore .
figure four  .  one  one myxobacteria form fruiting body .
( credit  modification of work by michiel vos ) table four  .  five summarize the characteristic of several important genera of deltaproteobacteria .
class deltaproteobacteria genus microscopic morphology unique characteristic bdellovibrio gram - negative , commashape rod obligate aerobe  motile  parasitic ( infect other bacteria ) desulfovibrio ( formerly desufuromonas ) gram - negative , commashaped rod reduce sulfur  can be use for removal of toxic and radioactive waste myxobacterium gram - negative , coccoid bacteria form colony ( swarm )
live in soil  can move by gliding  use as a model organism for study of intercellular communication ( signal ) table four  .  five one  one .
h . reichenbach .
“
myxobacteria , producers of novel bioactive substances .
" journal of industrial microbiology and biotechnology two  seven
no .
three
( two  zero  zero  one  )  one  four  nine – one  five  six . one  six  six chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what type of deltaproteobacteria form fruit body ?
epsilonproteobacteria
the small class of proteobacteria be epsilonproteobacteria , which be gram - negative microaerophilic bacteria ( mean - pron - only require small amount of oxygen in - pron - environment ) .
two clinically relevant genera of epsilonproteobacteria be campylobacter and helicobacter , both of which include human pathogen .
campylobacter can cause food poisoning that manifest as severe enteritis ( inflammation in the small intestine ) .
this condition , cause by the specie c . jejuni , be rather common in develop country , usually because of eat contaminate poultry product .
chicken often harbor c . jejuni in - pron - gastrointestinal tract and fece , and - pron - meat can become contaminate during processing .
within the genus helicobacter , the helical , flagellate bacterium h . pylorus have be identify as a beneficial member of the stomach microbiota , but - pron - be also the most common cause of chronic gastriti and ulcer of the stomach and duodenum ( figure four  .  one  two ) .
study have also show that h . pylori be link to stomach cancer . [ one  two ] h . pylorus be somewhat unusual in - pron - ability to survive in the highly acidic environment of the stomach .
- pron - produce urease and other enzyme that modify - pron - environment to make - pron - less acidic .
figure four  .  one  two helicobacter pylorus can cause chronic gastritis , which can lead to ulcer and stomach cancer .
table four  .  six summarize the characteristic of the most clinically relevant genera of epsilonproteobacteria .
class epsilonproteobacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics campylobacter gram - negative , spiral - shaped rod aerobic ( microaerophilic )  often infect chicken  may infect human via undercooked meat , cause severe enteritis helicobacter gram - negative , spiral - shaped rod aerobic ( microaerophilic ) bacterium  can damage the inner lining of the stomach , cause chronic gastritis , peptic ulcer , and stomach cancer table four  .  six one  two .
s . suerbaum , p . michetti .
“
helicobacter pylorus infection .
"
new england journal of medicine
three  four  seven
no .
one  five ( two  zero  zero  two  )  one  one  seven  five – one  one  eight  six .
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  six  seven  name two epsilonproteobacteria that cause gastrointestinal disorder .
four  .  three nonproteobacteria gram - negative bacteria and phototrophic bacteria learning objectives
 describe the unique feature of nonproteobacteria gram - negative bacteria  give an example of a nonproteobacteria bacterium in each category 
describe the unique feature of phototrophic bacteria
 identify phototrophic bacteria
the majority of the gram - negative bacteria belong to the phylum proteobacteria , discuss in the previous section .
those that do not be call the nonproteobacteria .
in this section , - pron - will describe three class of gram - negative nonproteobacteria  the spirochete , the cfb group , and the planctomycetes .
a diverse group of phototrophic bacteria that include proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria will be discuss at the end of this section .
spirochetes spirochetes be characterize by - pron - long ( up to two  five  zero μm ) , spiral - shaped body .
most spirochete be also very thin , which make - pron - difficult to examine gram - stain preparation under a conventional brightfield microscope .
darkfield fluorescent microscopy be typically use instead .
spirochete be also difficult or even impossible to culture .
- pron - be highly motile , use - pron - axial filament to propel - pron - .
the axial filament be similar to a flagellum , but - pron - wrap around the cell and run inside the cell body of a spirochete in the periplasmic space between the outer membrane and the plasma membrane ( figure four  .  one  three ) .
one  six  eight chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
four  .  one  three spirochetes be typically observe use darkfield microscopy ( leave ) .
however , electron microscopy ( top center , bottom center ) provide a more detailed view of - pron - cellular morphology .
the flagella find between the inner and outer membrane of spirochete wrap around the bacterium , cause a twisting motion use for locomotion .
( credit “ spirochete " micrograph 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ sem /
tem ” 
modification of work by guyard c , raffel sj , schrumpf me , dahlstrom e , sturdevant d , ricklefs sm , martens c , hayes sf , fischer er , hansen bt , porcella sf , schwan tg )
several genera of spirochete include human pathogen .
for example , the genus treponema include a species t . pallidum , which be further classify into four subspecie  t . pallidum pallidum , t . pallidum pertenue , t . pallidum carateum , and t . pallidum endemicum .
the subspecie t . pallidum pallidum cause the sexually transmit infection know as syphilis , the third most prevalent sexually transmit bacterial infection in the united states , after chlamydia and gonorrhea .
the other subspecie of t . pallidum cause tropical infectious disease of the skin , bone , and joint .
another genus of spirochete , borrelia , contain a number of pathogenic specie .
b . burgdorferi cause lyme disease , which be transmit by several genera of tick ( notably ixodes and amblyomma ) and often produce a " bull 's eye " rash , fever , fatigue , and , sometimes , debilitate arthritis .
b . recurren cause a condition know as relapse fever .
appendix d list the genera , specie , and related disease for spirochete .

why do scientist typically use darkfield fluorescent microscopy to visualize spirochete ?
chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  six  nine cytophaga , fusobacterium , and bacteroides the gram - negative nonproteobacteria of the genera cytophaga , fusobacterium , and bacteroides be classify together as a phylum and call the cfb group .
although - pron - be phylogenetically diverse , bacteria of the cfb group share some similarity in the sequence of nucleotide in - pron - dna .
- pron - be rod - shape bacteria adapt to anaerobic environment , such as the tissue of the gum , gut , and ruman of ruminate animal .
cfb bacteria be avid fermenter , able to process cellulose in ruman , thus enable ruminant animal to obtain carbon and energy from graze .
cytophaga be motile aquatic bacteria that glide .
fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious disease .
the large genus of the cfb group be bacteroides , which include dozen of specie that be prevalent inhabitant of the human large intestine , make up about three  zero % of the entire gut microbiome ( figure four  .  one  four ) .
one gram of human fece contain up to one  zero  zero billion bacteroide cell .
most bacteroide be mutualistic .
- pron - benefit from nutrient - pron - find in the gut , and human benefit from - pron - ability to prevent pathogen from colonize the large intestine .
indeed , when population of bacteroide be reduce in the gut - as often occur when a patient take antibiotic - the gut become a more favorable environment for pathogenic bacteria and fungi , which can cause secondary infection .
figure four  .  one  four bacteroides comprise up to three  zero % of the normal microbiota in the human gut .
( credit  noaa )
only a few specie of bacteroides be pathogenic .
b . melaninogenicus , for example , can cause wound infection in patient with weaken immune system .

why be cytophaga , fusobacterium , and bacteroides classify together as the cfb group ?
planctomycete
the planctomycetes be find in aquatic environment , inhabit freshwater , saltwater , and brackish water .
planctomycete be unusual in that - pron - reproduce by bud , mean that instead of one maternal cell split into two equal daughter cell in the process of binary fission , the mother cell form a bud that detach from the mother cell and live as an independent cell .
these so - call swarmer cell be motile and not attach to a surface .
however , - pron - will soon differentiate into sessile ( immobile ) cell with an appendage call a holdfast that allow - pron - to attach to surface in the water ( figure four  .  one  five ) .
only the sessile cell be able to reproduce .
one  seven  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  one  five ( a )
sessile planctomycetes have a holdfast that allow - pron - to adhere to surface in aquatic environment .
( b )
swarmer be motile and lack a holdfast .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) table four  .  seven summarize the characteristic of some of the most clinically relevant genera of nonproteobacteria .
nonproteobacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics bacteroides gram - negative bacillus obligate anaerobic bacteria  abundant in the human gastrointestinal tract  usually mutualistic , although some specie be opportunistic pathogen cytophaga gram - negative bacillus motile by gliding  live in soil or water  decompose cellulose  may cause disease in fish fusobacterium gram - negative bacillus with point end anaerobic  form  biofilm  some specie cause disease in human ( periodontitis , ulcer )
leptospira spiral - shape bacterium ( spirochete )
 gram negative - like ( better view by darkfield microscopy )  very thin aerobic , abundant in shallow water reservoir  infect rodent and domestic animal  can be transmit to human by infected animal ' urine  may cause severe disease borrelia gram - negative - like spirochete  very thin  better view by darkfield microscopy b . burgdorferi cause lyme disease and b . recurren cause relapse fever treponema gram - negative - like spirochete  very thin  better view by darkfield microscopy motile  do not grow in culture  t . pallidum ( subspecie t . pallidum pallidum ) cause syphilis table four  .  seven

how do planctomycetes reproduce ?
phototrophic bacteria
the phototrophic bacteria be a large and diverse category of bacteria that do not represent a taxon but , rather , a group of bacteria that use sunlight as - pron - primary source of energy .
this group contain both proteobacteria and chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  seven  one nonproteobacteria .
- pron - use solar energy to synthesize atp through photosynthesis .
when - pron - produce oxygen , - pron - perform oxygenic photosynthesis .
when - pron - do not produce oxygen , - pron - perform anoxygenic photosynthesis .
with the exception of some cyanobacteria , the majority of phototrophic bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis .
one large group of phototrophic bacteria include the purple or green bacteria that perform photosynthesis with the help of bacteriochlorophyll , which be green , purple , or blue pigment similar to chlorophyll in plant .
some of these bacteria have a vary amount of red or orange pigment call carotenoid .
- pron - color vary from orange to red to purple to green ( figure four  .  one  six ) , and - pron - be able to absorb light of various wavelength .
traditionally , these bacteria be classify into sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria  - pron - be further differentiate by color .
figure four  .  one  six purple and green sulfur bacteria use bacteriochlorophyll to perform photosynthesis .
the sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis , use sulfite as electron donor and release free elemental sulfur .
nonsulfur bacteria use organic substrate , such as succinate and malate , as donor of electron .
the purple sulfur bacteria oxidize hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur and sulfuric acid and get - pron - purple color from the pigment bacteriochlorophyll and carotenoid .
bacteria of the genus chromatium be purple sulfur gammaproteobacteria .
these microorganism be strict anaerobe and live in water .
- pron - use carbon dioxide as - pron - only source of carbon , but - pron - survival and growth be possible only in the presence of sulfite , which - pron - use as electron donor .
chromatium have be use as a model for study of bacterial photosynthesis since the one  nine  five  zero s . [ one  three ] the green sulfur bacteria use sulfide for oxidation and produce large amount of green bacteriochlorophyll .
the genus chlorobium be a green sulfur bacterium that be implicate in climate change because - pron - produce methane , a greenhouse gas .
these bacteria use at least four type of chlorophyll for photosynthesis .
the most prevalent of these , bacteriochlorophyll , be store in special vesicle - like organelle call chlorosome .
purple nonsulfur bacteria be similar to purple sulfur bacteria , except that - pron - use hydrogen rather than hydrogen sulfide for oxidation .
among the purple nonsulfur bacteria be the genus rhodospirillum .
these microorganism be facultative anaerobe , which be actually pink rather than purple , and can metabolize ( " fix " ) nitrogen .
- pron - may be valuable in the field of biotechnology because of - pron - potential ability to produce biological plastic and hydrogen fuel . [ one  four ]
the green nonsulfur bacteria be similar to green sulfur bacteria but - pron - use substrate other than sulfide for oxidation .
chloroflexus be an example of a green nonsulfur bacterium .
- pron - often have an orange color when - pron - grow in the dark , but - pron - become green when - pron - grow in sunlight .
- pron - store bacteriochlorophyll in chlorosome , similar to chlorobium , and perform anoxygenic photosynthesis , use organic sulfite ( low concentration ) or molecular hydrogen as electron donor , so - pron - can survive in the dark if oxygen be available .
chloroflexus do not have flagella one  three .
r . c . fuller et al .
“
carbon metabolism in chromatium .
" journal of biological chemistry two  three  six
( one  nine  six  one  )  two  one  four  zero – two  one  four  nine . one  four .
t . t .
selao et al .
"
comparative proteomic studies in rhodospirillum rubrum grown under different nitrogen conditions .
" journal of proteome research seven no .
eight
( two  zero  zero  eight  )  three  two  six  seven – three  two  seven  five . one  seven  two chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five but can glide , like cytophaga .
- pron - grow at a wide range of temperature , from three  five ° c to seven  zero ° c , thus can be thermophilic .
another large , diverse group of phototrophic bacteria compose the phylum cyanobacteria  - pron - get - pron - bluegreen color from the chlorophyll contain in - pron - cell ( figure four  .  one  seven ) .
specie of this group perform oxygenic photosynthesis , produce megaton of gaseous oxygen .
scientist hypothesize that cyanobacteria play a critical role in the change of - pron - planet 's anoxic atmosphere one – two billion year ago to the oxygen - rich environment - pron - have today . [ one  five ] figure four  .  one  seven ( a )
microcystis aeruginosa be a type of cyanobacteria commonly find in freshwater environment .
( b )
in warm temperature , m . aeruginosa and other cyanobacteria can multiply rapidly and produce neurotoxin , result in bloom that be harmful to fish and other aquatic animal .
( credit a  modification of work by dr . barry h . rosen / u . s . geological survey  credit b  modification of work by noaa )
cyanobacteria have other remarkable property .
amazingly adaptable , - pron - thrive in many habitat , include marine and freshwater environment , soil , and even rock .
- pron - can live at a wide range of temperature , even in the extreme temperature of the antarctic .
- pron - can live as unicellular organism or in colony , and - pron - can be filamentous , form sheath or biofilm .
many of - pron - fix nitrogen , convert molecular nitrogen into nitrite and nitrate that other bacteria , plant , and animal can use .
the reaction of nitrogen fixation occur in specialized cell call heterocyst .
photosynthesis in cyanobacteria be oxygenic , use the same type of chlorophyll a find in plant and algae as the primary photosynthetic pigment .
cyanobacteria also use phycocyanin and cyanophycin , two secondary photosynthetic pigment that give - pron - - pron - characteristic blue color .
- pron - be locate in special organelle call phycobilisome and in fold of the cellular membrane call thylakoid , which be remarkably similar to the photosynthetic apparatus of plant .
scientist hypothesize that plant originate from endosymbiosis of ancestral eukaryotic cell and ancestral photosynthetic bacteria . [ one  six ] cyanobacteria be also an interesting object of research in biochemistry , [ one  seven ] with study investigate - pron - potential as biosorbents[ one  eight ] and product of human nutrition . [ one  nine ]
unfortunately , cyanobacteria can sometimes have a negative impact on human health .
genera such as microcystis can form harmful cyanobacterial bloom , form dense mat on body of water and produce large quantity of toxin that can harm wildlife and human .
these toxin have be implicate in tumor of the liver and disease of the nervous system in animal and humans . [ two  zero ] one  five .
a . de los rios et al .
“
ultrastructural and genetic characteristics of endolithic cyanobacterial biofilms
colonizing antarctic granite rocks .
"
fems microbiology ecology five  nine
no .
two ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  three  eight  six – three  nine  five . one  six .
t . cavalier - smith .
"
membrane heredity and early chloroplast evolution .
”
trends in plant science five
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  zero  )  one  seven  four – one  eight  two .
one  seven .
s . zhang , d . a . bryant .
“
the tricarboxylic acid cycle in cyanobacteria .
”
science three  three  four
no .
six  zero  six  two ( two  zero  one  one  )  one  five  five  one – one  five  five  three .
one  eight .
a . cain et al .
“ cyanobacteria as a biosorbent for mercuric ion .
"
bioresource technology nine  nine
no .
one  four
( two  zero  zero  eight  )  six  five  seven  eight – six  five  eight  six .
one  nine .
c . s . ku et al .
"
edible blue - green algae reduce the production of pro - inflammatory cytokines by inhibit nf - κb pathway in macrophages and splenocytes .
"
biochimica et biophysica acta one  eight  three  zero
no .
four ( two  zero  one  three  )  two  nine  eight  one – two  nine  eight  eight .
two  zero .
i . stewart et al .
cyanobacterial poisoning in livestock , wild mammals and birds – an overview .
advance in experimental medicine chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  seven  three table four  .  eight summarize the characteristic of important phototrophic bacteria .
phototrophic bacteria phylum class example genus or species common name oxygenic or anoxygenic sulfur deposition cyanobacteria cyanophyceae microcystis aeruginosa blue - green bacteria oxygenic none chlorobi chlorobia chlorobium green sulfur bacteria anoxygenic outside the cell chloroflexi ( division )
chloroflexi chloroflexus green nonsulfur bacteria anoxygenic none alphaproteobacteria rhodospirillum purple nonsulfur bacteria anoxygenic none betaproteobacteria rhodocyclus purple nonsulfur bacteria proteobacteria anoxygenic none gammaproteobacteria chromatium purple sulfur bacteria anoxygenic inside the cell table four  .  eight

what characteristic make phototrophic bacteria different from other prokaryote ?
four  .  four
gram - positive bacteria learning objectives
 describe the unique feature of each category of high g+c and low g+c gram - positive bacteria

identify similarity and difference between high g+c and low g+c bacterial group  give an example of a bacterium of high g+c and low g+c group commonly associate with each category prokaryote be identify as gram - positive if - pron - have a multiple layer matrix of peptidoglycan form the cell wall .
crystal violet , the primary stain of the gram stain procedure , be readily retain and stabilize within this matrix , cause gram - positive prokaryote to appear purple under a brightfield microscope after gram staining .
for many year , the retention of gram stain be one of the main criterion use to classify prokaryote , even though some prokaryote do not readily stain with either the primary or secondary stain use in the gram stain procedure .
advance in nucleic acid biochemistry have reveal additional characteristic that can be use to classify grampositive prokaryote , namely the guanine to cytosine ratio ( g+c ) in dna and the composition of one  six s rrna subunit .
microbiologist currently recognize two distinct group of gram - positive , or weakly stain gram - positive , prokaryote .
the class actinobacteria comprise the high g+c gram - positive bacteria , which have more than five  zero % and biology six  one  nine ( two  zero  zero  eight  )  six  one  three – six  three  seven . one  seven  four chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five guanine and cytosine nucleotide in - pron - dna .
the class bacilli comprise low g+c gram - positive bacteria , which have less than five  zero % of guanine and cytosine nucleotide in - pron - dna .
actinobacteria  high g+c gram - positive bacteria
the name actinobacteria come from the greek word for ray and small rod , but actinobacteria be very diverse .
- pron - microscopic appearance can range from thin filamentous branching rod to coccobacilli .
some actinobacteria be very large and complex , whereas other be among the small independently live organism .
most actinobacteria live in the soil , but some be aquatic .
the vast majority be aerobic .
one distinctive feature of this group be the presence of several different peptidoglycan in the cell wall .
the genus actinomyces be a much study representative of actinobacteria .
actinomyce spp . play an important role in soil ecology , and some specie be human pathogen .
a number of actinomyces spp .
inhabit the human mouth and be opportunistic pathogen , cause infectious disease like periodontitis ( inflammation of the gums ) and oral abscess .
the specie a . israelii be an anaerobe notorious for cause endocarditis ( inflammation of the inner lining of the heart )
( figure four  .  one  eight ) .
figure four  .  one  eight ( a )
actinomyce israelii ( false - color scanning electron micrograph [ sem ] ) have a branch structure .
( b )
corynebacterium diphtheria cause the deadly disease diphtheria .
note the distinctive palisade .
( c )
the gramvariable bacterium gardnerella vaginalis cause bacterial vaginosis in woman .
this micrograph show a pap smear from a woman with vaginosis .
( credit a  modification of work by “ grahamcolm” / wikimedia commons  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by mwakigonja ar , torres lm , mwakyoma ha , kaaya ee )
the genus mycobacterium be represent by bacilli cover with a mycolic acid coat .
this waxy coat protect the bacteria from some antibiotic , prevent - pron - from dry out , and block penetration by gram stain reagent ( see staining microscopic specimens ) .
because of this , a special acid - fast staining procedure be use to visualize these bacteria .
the genus mycobacterium be an important cause of a diverse group of infectious disease .
m . tuberculosis be the causative agent of tuberculosis , a disease that primarily impact the lung but can infect other part of the body as well .
- pron - have be estimate that one - third of the world 's population have be infect with m . tuberculosis and million of new infection occur each year .
treatment of m . tuberculosis be challenge and require patient to take a combination of drug for an extended time .
complicate treatment even further be the development and spread of multidrug - resistant strain of this pathogen .
another pathogenic specie , m . leprae , be the cause of hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) , a chronic disease that impact peripheral nerve and the integrity of the skin and mucosal surface of the respiratory tract .
loss of pain sensation and the presence of skin lesion increase susceptibility to secondary injury and infection with other pathogen .
bacteria in the genus corynebacterium contain diaminopimelic acid in - pron - cell wall , and microscopically often form palisade , or pair of rod - shaped cell resemble the letter v . cells may contain metachromatic granule , intracellular storage of inorganic phosphate that be useful for identification of corynebacterium .
the vast majority of corynebacterium spp .
be nonpathogenic  however , c . diphtheria be the causative agent of diphtheria , a disease that can be fatal , especially in child ( figure four  .  one  eight ) .
c . diphtheria produce a toxin that form a pseudomembrane in chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  seven  five the patient 's throat , cause swelling , difficulty breathing , and other symptom that can become serious if untreated .
the genus bifidobacterium consist of filamentous anaerobe , many of which be commonly find in the gastrointestinal tract , vagina , and mouth .
in fact , bifidobacterium spp . constitute a substantial part of the human gut microbiota and be frequently use as probiotic and in yogurt production .
the genus gardnerella , contain only one specie , g . vaginalis .
this species be define as " gram - variable " because - pron - small coccobacilli do not show consistent result when gram stain ( figure four  .  one  eight ) .
base on - pron - genome , - pron - be place into the high g+c gram - positive group .
g . vaginalis can cause bacterial vaginosis in woman  symptom be typically mild or even undetectable , but can lead to complication during pregnancy .
table four  .  nine summarize the characteristic of some important genera of actinobacteria .
additional information on actinobacteria appear in appendix d . actinobacteria 
high g+c gram - positive example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics actinomyces gram - positive bacillus  in colony , show fungus - like thread ( hypha )
facultative anaerobe  in soil , decompose organic matter  in the human mouth , may cause gum disease arthrobacter gram - positive bacillus ( at the exponential stage of growth ) or coccus ( in stationary phase ) obligate aerobe  divide by “ snap , " form v - like pair of daughter cell  degrade phenol , can be use in bioremediation bifidobacterium gram - positive , filamentous actinobacterium anaerobes commonly find in human gut microbiota corynebacterium gram - positive bacillus aerobes or facultative anaerobe  form palisade  grow slowly  require enriched medium in culture  c . diphtheriae cause diphtheria frankia gram - positive , fungus - like ( filamentous ) bacillus nitrogen - fix bacteria  live in symbiosis with legume gardnerella gram - variable coccobacillus colonize the human vagina , may alter the microbial ecology , thus lead to vaginosis micrococcus gram - positive coccus , form microscopic cluster ubiquitous in the environment and on the human skin  oxidasepositive ( as oppose to morphologically similar s . aureus )  some be opportunistic pathogen mycobacterium gram - positive , acidfast bacillus slow grow , aerobic , resistant to drying and phagocytosis  cover with a waxy coat make of mycolic acid  m . tuberculosis cause tuberculosis  m . leprae cause leprosy nocardia weakly gram - positive bacillus  form acidfast branch may colonize the human gingiva  may cause severe pneumonia and inflammation of the skin propionibacterium gram - positive bacillus aerotolerant anaerobe  slow - grow  p . acne reproduce in the human sebaceous gland and may cause or contribute to acne table four  .  nine one  seven  six chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five actinobacteria 
high g+c gram - positive example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics rhodococcus gram - positive bacillus strict aerobe  use in industry for biodegradation of pollutant  r . fascian be a plant pathogen , and r . equi cause pneumonia in foal
streptomyces gram - positive , fungus - like ( filamentous ) bacillus very diverse genus ( > five  zero  zero specie )  aerobic , spore - form bacteria  scavenger , decomposer find in soil ( give the soil - pron - " earthy " odor )  use in pharmaceutical industry as antibiotic producer ( more than two - third of clinically useful antibiotic ) table four  .  nine

what be one distinctive feature of actinobacteria ?
low g+c gram - positive bacteria
the low g+c gram - positive bacteria have less than five  zero % guanine and cytosine in - pron - dna , and this group of bacteria include a number of genera of bacteria that be pathogenic .
part three
base on - pron - symptom , marsha 's doctor suspect that - pron - have a case of tuberculosis .
although less common in the united states , tuberculosis be still extremely common in many part of the world , include nigeria .
marsha 's work there in a medical lab likely expose - pron - to mycobacterium tuberculosis , the bacterium that cause tuberculosis .
marsha 's doctor order - pron - to stay at home , wear a respiratory mask , and confine - pron - to one room as much as possible .
- pron - also say that marsha have to take one semester off school .
- pron - prescribe isoniazid and rifampin , antibiotic use in a drug cocktail to treat tuberculosis , which marsha be to take three time a day for at least three month .

why do the doctor order marsha to stay home for three month ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clostridia one large and diverse class of low g+c gram - positive bacteria be clostridia .
the best study genus of this class be clostridium .
these rod - shape bacteria be generally obligate anaerobe that produce endospore and can be find in anaerobic habitat like soil and aquatic sediment rich in organic nutrient .
the endospore may survive for many year .
clostridium spp . produce more kind of protein toxin than any other bacterial genus , and several specie be human pathogen .
c . perfringen be the third most common cause of food poisoning in the united states and be the causative agent of an even more serious disease call gas gangrene .
gas gangrene occur when c . perfringen endospore clinical focus chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  seven  seven enter a wound and germinate , become viable bacterial cell and produce a toxin that can cause the necrosis ( death ) of tissue .
c . tetani , which cause tetanus , produce a neurotoxin that be able to enter neuron , travel to region of the central nervous system where - pron - block the inhibition of nerve impulse involve in muscle contraction , and cause a life - threaten spastic paralysis .
c . botulinum produce botulinum neurotoxin , the most lethal biological toxin know .
botulinum toxin be responsible for rare but frequently fatal case of botulism .
the toxin block the release of acetylcholine in neuromuscular junction , cause flaccid paralysis .
in very small concentration , botulinum toxin have be use to treat muscle pathology in human and in a cosmetic procedure to eliminate wrinkle .
c . difficile be a common source of hospital - acquire infection ( figure four  .  one  nine ) that can result in serious and even fatal case of colitis ( inflammation of the large intestine ) .
infection often occur in patient who be immunosuppressed or undergo antibiotic therapy that alter the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract .
appendix d list the genera , specie , and related disease for clostridia .
figure four  .  one  nine clostridium difficile , a gram - positive , rod - shape bacterium , cause severe colitis and diarrhea , often after the normal gut microbiota be eradicate by antibiotic .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
lactobacillale
the order lactobacillales comprise low g+c gram - positive bacteria that include both bacillus and cocci in the genera lactobacillus , leuconostoc , enterococcus , and streptococcus .
bacteria of the latter three genera typically be spherical or ovoid and often form chain .
streptococcus , the name of which come from the greek word for twisted chain , be responsible for many type of infectious disease in human .
specie from this genus , often refer to as streptococci , be usually classify by serotype call lancefield group , and by - pron - ability to lyse red blood cell when grow on blood agar .
s . pyogene belong to the lancefield group a , β - hemolytic streptococcus .
this species be consider a pyogenic pathogen because of the associated pu production observe with infection - pron - cause ( figure four  .  two  zero ) .
s . pyogene be the most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis ( strep throat )  - pron - be also an important cause of various skin infection that can be relatively mild ( e . g . , impetigo ) or life threaten ( e . g . , necrotize fasciitis , also know as flesh eat disease ) , life threaten .
one  seven  eight chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  two  zero ( a ) a gram - stain speciman of streptococcus pyogene show the chain of cocci characteristic of this organism 's morphology .
( b ) s . pyogene on blood agar show characteristic lysis of red blood cell , indicate by the halo of clear around colony .
( credit a , b  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
the nonpyogenic ( i . e . , not associate with pus production ) streptococci be a group of streptococcal specie that be not a taxon but be group together because - pron - inhabit the human mouth .
the nonpyogenic streptococci do not belong to any of the lancefield group .
most be commensal , but a few , such as s . mutan , be implicate in the development of dental carie .
s . pneumoniae ( commonly refer to as pneumococcus ) , be a streptococcus specie that also do not belong to any lancefield group .
s . pneumoniae cell appear microscopically as diplococci , pair of cell , rather than the long chain typical of most streptococci .
scientist have know since the one  nine th century that s . pneumoniae cause pneumonia and other respiratory infection .
however , this bacterium can also cause a wide range of other disease , include meningitis , septicemia , osteomyelitis , and endocarditis , especially in newborn , the elderly , and patient with immunodeficiency .
bacilli
the name of the class bacilli suggest that - pron - be make up of bacteria that be bacillus in shape , but - pron - be a morphologically diverse class that include bacillus - shape and cocccus - shaped genera .
among the many genera in this class be two that be very important clinically 
bacillus and staphylococcus .
bacteria in the genus bacillus be bacillus in shape and can produce endospore .
- pron - include aerobe or facultative anaerobe .
a number of bacillus spp . be use in various industry , include the production of antibiotic ( e . g . , barnase ) , enzymes ( e . g . , alpha - amylase , bamh one restriction endonuclease ) , and detergent ( e . g . , subtilisin ) .
two notable pathogen belong to the genus bacillus .
b . anthracis be the pathogen that cause anthrax , a severe disease that affect wild and domesticate animal and can spread from infected animal to human .
anthrax manifest in human as charcoal - black ulcer on the skin , severe enterocolitis , pneumonia , and brain damage due to swell .
if untreated , anthrax be lethal .
b . cereus , a closely relate specie , be a pathogen that may cause food poisoning .
- pron - be a rod - shape specie that form chain .
colony appear milky white with irregular shape when culture on blood agar ( figure four  .  two  one ) .
one other important specie be b . thuringiensis .
this bacterium produce a number of substance use as insecticide because - pron - be toxic for insect .
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  seven  nine figure four  .  two  one
( a )
in this gram - stain speciman , the violet rod - shape cell form chain be the gram - positive bacteria bacillus cereus .
the small , pink cell be the gram - negative bacteria escherichia coli .
( b )
in this culture , white colony of b . cereus have be grow on sheep blood agar .
( credit a  modification of work by “ bibliomaniac one  five ” / wikimedia commons  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
the genus staphylococcus also belong to the class bacilli , even though - pron - shape be coccus rather than a bacillus .
the name staphylococcus come from a greek word for bunch of grape , which describe - pron - microscopic appearance in culture ( figure four  .  two  two ) .
staphylococcus spp .
be facultative anaerobic , halophilic , and nonmotile .
the two beststudie specie of this genus be s . epidermidis and s . aureus .
figure four  .  two  two
this sem of staphylococcus aureus illustrate the typical " grape - like " clustering of cell .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) s . epidermidis ,
whose main habitat be the human skin , be think to be nonpathogenic for human with healthy immune system , but in patient with immunodeficiency , - pron - may cause infection in skin wound and prosthese ( e . g . , artificial joint , heart valve ) .
s . epidermidis be also an important cause of infection associate with intravenous catheter .
this make - pron - a dangerous pathogen in hospital setting , where many patient may be immunocompromise .
strain of s . aureus cause a wide variety of infection in human , include skin infection that produce boil , carbuncle , cellulitis , or impetigo .
certain strain of s . aureus produce a substance call enterotoxin , which can cause severe enteritis , often call staph food poisoning .
some strain of s . aureus produce the toxin responsible for toxic shock syndrome , which can result in cardiovascular collapse and death .
many strain of s . aureus have develop resistance to antibiotic .
some antibiotic - resistant strain be designate as methicillin - resistant s . aureus ( mrsa ) and vancomycin - resistant s . aureus ( vrsa ) .
these strain be some of one  eight  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the most difficult to treat because - pron - exhibit resistance to nearly all available antibiotic , not just methicillin and vancomycin .
because - pron - be difficult to treat with antibiotic , infection can be lethal .
mrsa and vrsa be also contagious , pose a serious threat in hospital , nursing home , dialysis facility , and other place where there be large population of elderly , bedridden , and / or immunocompromise patient .
appendix d list the genera , specie , and related disease for bacilli .
mycoplasmas
although mycoplasma spp .
do not possess a cell wall and , therefore , be not stain by gram - stain reagent , this genus be still include with the low g+c gram - positive bacteria .
the genus mycoplasma include more than one  zero  zero specie , which share several unique characteristic .
- pron - be very small cell , some with a diameter of about zero  .  two μm , which be small than some large virus .
- pron - have no cell wall and , therefore , be pleomorphic , mean that - pron - may take on a variety of shape and can even resemble very small animal cell .
because - pron - lack a characteristic shape , - pron - can be difficult to identify .
one species , m . pneumoniae , cause the mild form of pneumonia know as “ walk pneumonia " or " atypical pneumonia .
"
this form of pneumonia be typically less severe than form cause by other bacteria or virus .
table four  .  one  zero summarize the characteristic of notable genera low g+c gram - positive bacteria .
bacilli  low g+c gram - positive bacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics bacillus large ,
gram - positive bacillus aerobes or facultative anaerobe  form endospore
 b . anthracis cause anthrax in cattle and human , b . cereus may cause food poisoning clostridium gram - positive bacillus strict anaerobes  form endospore  all know specie be pathogenic , cause tetanus , gas gangrene , botulism , and colitis enterococcus gram - positive coccus  form microscopic pair in culture ( resemble streptococcus pneumoniae )
anaerobic aerotolerant bacteria , abundant in the human gut , may cause urinary tract and other infection in the nosocomial environment lactobacillus gram - positive bacillus facultative anaerobe  ferment sugar into lactic acid  part of the vaginal microbiota  use as probiotic leuconostoc gram - positive coccus  may form microscopic chain in culture fermenter , use in food industry to produce sauerkraut and kefir mycoplasma
the small bacteria  appear pleomorphic under electron microscope have no cell wall  classify as low g+c gram - positive bacteria because of - pron - genome  m . pneumoniae cause “ walk " pneumonia staphylococcus gram - positive coccus  form microscopic cluster in culture that resemble bunch of grape tolerate high salt concentration  facultative anaerobe  produce catalase  s . aureus can also produce coagulase and toxin responsible for local ( skin ) and generalize infection streptococcus gram - positive coccus  form chain or pair in culture diverse genus  classify into group base on share certain antigen  some specie cause hemolysis and may produce toxin responsible for human local ( throat ) and generalize disease table four  .  one  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  eight  one bacilli  low g+c gram - positive bacteria example genus microscopic morphology unique characteristics ureaplasma similar to mycoplasma part of the human vaginal and
low urinary tract microbiota  may cause inflammation , sometimes lead to internal scarring and infertility table four  .  one  zero
 name
some way in which streptococci be classify .

name one pathogenic low g+c gram - positive bacterium and a disease - pron - cause .
resolution marsha 's sputum sample be send to the microbiology lab to confirm the identity of the microorganism cause - pron - infection .
the lab also perform antimicrobial susceptibility testing ( ast ) on the sample to confirm that the physician have prescribe the correct antimicrobial drug .
direct microscopic examination of the sputum reveal acid - fast bacteria ( afb ) present in marsha 's sputum .
when place in culture , there be no sign of growth for the first eight day , suggest that microorganism be either dead or grow very slowly .
slow growth be a distinctive characteristic of m . tuberculosis .
after four week , the lab microbiologist observe distinctive colorless granulate colony ( figure four  .  two  three ) .
the colony contain afb show the same microscopic characteristic as those reveal during the direct microscopic examination of marsha 's sputum .
to confirm the identification of the afb , sample of the colony be analyze use nucleic acid hybridization , or direct nucleic acid amplification ( naa ) testing .
when a bacterium be acid - fast , - pron - be classify in the family mycobacteriaceae .
dna sequencing of variable genomic region of the dna extract from these bacteria reveal that - pron - be high g+c .
this fact serve to finalize marsha 's diagnosis as infection with m . tuberculosis .
after nine month of treatment with the drug prescribe by - pron - doctor , marsha make a full recovery .
clinical focus one  eight  two chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  two  three m . tuberculosis grow on löwenstein - jensen ( lj ) agar in distinct colony .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention ) go back to the previous clinical focus box .
biopiracy and bioprospecting
in one  nine  six  nine , an employee of a swiss pharmaceutical company be vacation in norway and decide to collect some soil sample .
- pron - take - pron - back to - pron - lab , and the swiss company subsequently use the fungus tolypocladium inflatum in those sample to develop cyclosporine a , a drug widely use in patient who undergo tissue or organ transplantation .
the swiss company earn more than $ one billion a year for production of cyclosporine a , yet norway receive nothing in return -
no payment to the government or benefit for the norwegian people .
despite the fact the cyclosporine a save numerous life , many consider the mean by which the soil sample be obtain to be an act of “ biopiracy , " essentially a form of theft .
do the end justify the mean in a case like this ?
nature be full of as - yet - undiscovered bacteria and other microorganism that could one day be use to develop new life - save drug or treatments . [ two  one ] pharmaceutical and biotechnology company stand to reap huge profit from such discovery , but ethical question remain .
to whom do biological resource belong ?
should company who invest ( and risk ) million of dollar in research and development be require to share revenue or royalty for the right to access biological resource ?
compensation be not the only issue when - pron - come to bioprospecting .
some community and culture be philosophically opposed to bioprospecte , fear unforeseen consequence of collect genetic or biological material .
native hawaiians , for example , be very protective of - pron - unique biological resource .
for many year , - pron - be unclear what right government agency , private corporation , and citizen have when - pron - come to collect sample of microorganism from public land .
then , in one  nine  nine  three , the convention on biological diversity grant each nation the right to any genetic and biological material find on - pron - own land .
scientist can no longer collect sample without a prior arrangement with the land owner for compensation .
this convention now ensure that company act ethically in obtain the sample - pron - use to create - pron - eye on ethics chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  eight  three product .
four  .  five
deeply branching bacteria learning objectives
 describe the unique feature of deeply branch bacteria  give example of significant deeply branch bacteria on a phylogenetic tree ( see a systematic approach ) , the trunk or root of the tree represent a common ancient evolutionary ancestor , often call the last universal common ancestor ( luca ) , and the branch be - pron - evolutionary descendant .
scientist consider the deeply branch bacteria , such as the genus acetothermus , to be the first of these non - luca form of life produce by evolution some three  .  five billion year ago .
when place on the phylogenetic tree , - pron - stem from the common root of life , deep and close to the luca root - hence the name “ deeply branch " ( figure four  .  two  four ) .
figure four  .  two  four
the star on this phylogenetic tree of life show the position of the deeply branch bacteria acetothermus .
( credit  modification of work by eric gaba )
the deeply branch bacteria may provide clue regard the structure and function of ancient and now extinct form of life .
- pron - can hypothesize that ancient bacteria , like the deeply branch bacteria that still exist , be thermophile or hyperthermophile , mean that - pron - thrive at very high temperature .
acetothermus paucivoran , a gram - negative anaerobic bacterium discover in one  nine  eight  eight in sewage sludge , be a thermophile grow at an optimal temperature of five  eight ° c . [ two  two ]
scientist have determine - pron - to be the deep branch bacterium , or the close evolutionary relative of the luca ( figure four  .  two  four ) .
the class aquificae include deeply branch bacteria that be adapt to the harsh condition on - pron - planet , resemble the condition think to dominate the earth when life first appear .
bacteria from the genus aquifex two  one .
j . andre .
bioethic as practice .
chapel hill , nc 
university of north carolina press , two  zero  zero  two .
two  two .
g . dietrich et al .
“
acetothermus paucivoran , gen .
nov .
, sp .
november , a strictly anaerobic , thermophilic bacterium from sewage sludge , ferment hexose to acetate , co two , and h two .
" systematic and applied microbiology one  zero no .
two ( one  nine  eight  eight  )  one  seven  four – one  seven  nine . one  eight  four
chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five be hyperthermophile , live in hot spring at a temperature high than nine  zero ° c .
the specie a . pyrophilus thrive near underwater volcano and thermal ocean vent , where the temperature of water ( under high pressure ) can reach one  three  eight ° c .
aquifex bacteria use inorganic substance as nutrient .
for example , a . pyrophilus can reduce oxygen , and - pron - be able to reduce nitrogen in anaerobic condition .
- pron - also show a remarkable resistance to ultraviolet light and ionize radiation .
take together , these observation support the hypothesis that the ancient ancestor of deeply branch bacteria begin evolve more than three billion year ago , when the earth be hot and lack an atmosphere , expose the bacteria to nonionize and ionize radiation .
the class thermotogae be represent mostly by hyperthermophilic , as well as some mesophilic ( prefer moderate temperature ) , anaerobic gram - negative bacteria whose cell be wrap in a peculiar sheath - like outer membrane call a toga .
the thin layer of peptidoglycan in - pron - cell wall have an unusual structure  - pron - contain diaminopimelic acid and d - lysine .
these bacteria be able to use a variety of organic substrate and produce molecular hydrogen , which can be use in industry .
the class contain several genera , of which the good know be the genus thermotoga .
one species of this genus , t . maritima , live near the thermal ocean vent and thrive in temperature of nine  zero ° c  another species , t . subterranea , live in underground oil reservoir .
finally , the deeply branch bacterium deinococcus radioduran belong to a genus whose name be derive from a greek word mean terrible berry .
nicknamed “
conan the bacterium , " d . radioduran be consider a polyextremophile because of - pron - ability to survive under the many different kind of extreme condition
- extreme heat , drought , vacuum , acidity , and radiation .
- pron - owe - pron - name to - pron - ability to withstand dos of ionize radiation that kill all other know bacteria  this special ability be attribute to some unique mechanism of dna repair .
figure four  .  two  five deinococcus radioduran , or “ conan the bacterium
, " survive in the harshest condition on earth .
four  .  six archaea learning objectives
 describe the unique feature of each category of archaea 
explain why archaea may not be associate with human microbiome or pathology  give common example of archaea commonly associate with unique environmental habitat like organism in the domain bacteria , organism of the domain archaea be all unicellular organism .
however , archaea differ structurally from bacteria in several significant way , as discuss in unique characteristics of chapter four  prokaryotic diversity one  eight  five prokaryotic cells .
to summarize   the archaeal cell membrane be compose of ether linkage with branched isoprene chain ( as oppose to the bacterial cell membrane , which have est linkage with unbranched fatty acid ) .
 archaeal cell wall lack peptidoglycan , but some contain a structurally similar substance call pseudopeptidoglycan or pseudomurein .

the genome of archaea be large and more complex than those of bacteria .
domain archaea be as diverse as domain bacteria , and - pron - representative can be find in any habitat .
some archaea be mesophile , and many be extremophile , prefer extreme hot or cold , extreme salinity , or other condition that be hostile to most other form of life on earth .
- pron - metabolism be adapt to the harsh environment , and - pron - can perform methanogenesis , for example , which bacteria and eukaryote can not .
the size and complexity of the archaeal genome make - pron - difficult to classify .
most taxonomist agree that within the archaea , there be currently five major phylum  crenarchaeota , euryarchaeota , korarchaeota , nanoarchaeota , and thaumarchaeota .
there be likely many other archaeal group that have not yet be systematically study and classify .
with few exception , archaea be not present in the human microbiota , and none be currently know to be associate with infectious disease in human , animal , plant , or microorganism .
however , many play important role in the environment and may thus have an indirect impact on human health .
crenarchaeota crenarchaeota be a class of archaea that be extremely diverse , contain genera and specie that differ vastly in - pron - morphology and requirement for growth .
all crenarchaeota be aquatic organism , and - pron - be think to be the most abundant microorganism in the ocean .
most , but not all , crenarchaeota be hyperthermophile  some of - pron - ( notably , the genus pyrolobus ) be able to grow at temperature
up to one  one  three ° c . [ two  three ]
archaea of the genus sulfolobus ( figure four  .  two  six ) be thermophile that prefer temperature around seven  zero – eight  zero ° c and acidophile that prefer a ph of two – three  . [ two  four ]
sulfolobus can live in aerobic or anaerobic environment .
in the presence of oxygen , sulfolobus spp .
use metabolic process similar to those of heterotroph .
in anaerobic environment , - pron - oxidize sulfur to produce sulfuric acid , which be store in granule .
sulfolobus spp . be use in biotechnology for the production of thermostable and acid - resistant protein call affitins . [ two  five ]
affitins can bind and neutralize various antigen ( molecule find in toxin or infectious agent that provoke an immune response from the body ) .
two  three .
e . blochl
et al . “pyrolobus fumani , gen .
and sp .
nov .
, represent a novel group of archaea , extend the upper temperature limit for life to one  one  three ° c .
"
extremophile one ( one  nine  nine  seven  )  one  four – two  one . two  four .
t . d . brock et al .
“
sulfolobus  a new genus of sulfur - oxidizing bacteria live at low ph and high temperature .
"
archiv für mikrobiologie eight  four
no .
one
( one  nine  seven  two  )  five  four – six  eight .
two  five .
s . pacheco et al .
“
affinity transfer to the archaeal extremophilic sac seven d protein by insertion of a cdr .
”
protein engineering design and selection two  seven
no .
one  zero ( two  zero  one  four  )  four  three  one - four  three  eight . one  eight  six
chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure four  .  two  six sulfolobus , an archaeon of the class crenarchaeota , oxidize sulfur and store sulfuric acid in - pron - granule .
another genus , thermoproteus , be represent by strictly anaerobic organism with an optimal growth temperature of eight  five ° c .
- pron - have flagella and , therefore , be motile .
thermoproteus have a cellular membrane in which lipid form a monolayer rather than a bilayer , which be typical for archaea .
- pron - metabolism be autotrophic .
to synthesize atp , thermoproteus spp .
reduce sulfur or molecular hydrogen and use carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide as a source of carbon .
thermoproteus be think to be the deepest - branch genus of archaea , and thus be a live example of some of - pron - planet 's early form of life .

what type of environment do crenarchaeota prefer ?
euryarchaeota
the phylum euryarchaeota include several distinct class .
specie in the class methanobacteria , methanococci , and methanomicrobia represent archaea that can be generally describe as methanogen .
methanogen be unique in that - pron - can reduce carbon dioxide in the presence of hydrogen , produce methane .
- pron - can live in the most extreme environment and can reproduce at temperature vary from below freeze to boiling .
methanogen have be find in hot spring as well as deep under ice in greenland .
some scientist have even hypothesize that methanogen may inhabit the planet mars because the mixture of gas produce by methanogen resemble the makeup of the martian atmosphere . [ two  six ]
methanogens be think to contribute to the formation of anoxic sediment by produce hydrogen sulfide , make “ marsh gas .
"
- pron - also produce gas in ruminant and human .
some genera of methanogen , notably methanosarcina , can grow and produce methane in the presence of oxygen , although the vast majority be strict anaerobe .
the class halobacteria ( which be name before scientist recognize the distinction between archaea and bacteria ) include halophilic ( " salt - love " ) archaea .
halobacteria require a very high concentration of sodium chloride in - pron - aquatic environment .
the required concentration be close to saturation , at three  six %  such environment include the dead sea as well as some salty lake in antarctica and south - central asia .
one remarkable feature of these organism two  six .
r . r . britt “ crater critters 
where mars microbes may lurk .
"
http / / www . space . com /  one  eight  eight  zero  - crater - critters - mars - microbes - lurk . html .
accessed april seven , two  zero  one  five .
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  eight  seven be that - pron - perform photosynthesis use the protein bacteriorhodopsin , which give - pron - , and the body of water - pron - inhabit , a beautiful purple color ( figure four  .  two  seven ) .
figure four  .  two  seven halobacteria grow in these salt pond give - pron - a distinct purple color .
( credit  modification of work by tony hisgett )
notable specie of halobacteria include halobacterium salinarum , which may be the old live organism on earth  scientist have isolate - pron - dna from fossil that be two  five  zero million year old . [ two  seven ]
another specie , haloferax volcanii , show a very sophisticated system of ion exchange , which enable - pron - to balance the concentration of salt at high temperature .

where do halobacteria live ?
find a link between archaea and disease archaea be not know to cause any disease in human , animal , plant , bacteria , or in other archaea .
although this make sense for the extremophile , not all archaea live in extreme environment .
many genera and specie of archaea be mesophile , so - pron - can live in human and animal microbiome , although - pron - rarely do .
as - pron - have learn , some methanogen exist in the human gastrointestinal tract .
yet - pron - have no reliable evidence point to any archaean as the causative agent of any human disease .
still , scientist have attempt to find link between human disease and archaea .
for example , in two  zero  zero  four , lepp et al . present evidence that an archaean call methanobrevibacter oralis inhabit the gum of patient with periodontal disease .
the author suggest that the activity of these methanogen cause the disease . [ two  eight ]
however , - pron - be subsequently show that there be no causal relationship between m . oralis and periodontitis .
- pron - seem more likely that periodontal disease cause an enlargement of anaerobic region in the mouth that be subsequently populate by m . oralis . [ two  nine ]
micro connections two  seven .
h . vreeland et al .
“
fatty acid and da analyses of permian bacterium isolate from ancient salt crystals reveal difference with - pron - modern relatives .
"
extremophile one  zero ( two  zero  zero  six  )  seven  one – seven  eight .
two  eight .
p . w . lepp et al .
“
methanogenic archaea and human gum disease .
”
proceedings of the national academies of science of the united one  eight  eight chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five there remain no good answer as to why archaea do not seem to be pathogenic , but scientist continue to speculate and hope to find the answer .
summary four  .  one prokaryote habitats , relationships , and microbiomes 
prokaryotes be unicellular microorganism whose cell have no nucleus .

prokaryotes can be find everywhere on - pron - planet , even in the most extreme environment .

prokaryote be very flexible metabolically , so - pron - be able to adjust - pron - feeding to the available natural resource .

prokaryotes live in community that interact among - pron - and with large organism that - pron - use as host ( include human ) .

the totality of form of prokaryote ( particularly bacteria ) live on the human body be call the human microbiome , which vary between region of the body and individual , and change over time .

the totality of form of prokaryote ( particularly bacteria ) live in a certain region of the human body ( e . g . , mouth , throat , gut , eye , vagina ) be call the microbiota of this region .

prokaryotes be classify into domain archaea and bacteria .

in recent year , the traditional approach to classification of prokaryote have be supplement by approach base on molecular genetic .
four  .  two proteobacteria  proteobacteria be a phylum of gram - negative bacteria discover by carl woese in the one  nine  eight  zero base on nucleotide sequence homology .

proteobacteria be further classify into the class alpha - , beta - , gamma - , delta - and epsilonproteobacteria , each class have separate order , family , genera , and specie .

alphaproteobacteria be oligotroph .
the taxa chlamydia and rickettsia be obligate intracellular pathogen , feed on cell of host organism  - pron - be metabolically inactive outside of the host cell .
some alphaproteobacteria can convert atmospheric nitrogen to nitrite , make nitrogen usable by other form of life .

betaproteobacteria be eutroph .
- pron - include human pathogen of the genus neisseria and the specie bordetella pertussis .

gammaproteobacteria be the large and the most diverse group of proteobacteria .
many be human pathogen that be aerobe or facultative anaerobe .
some gammaproteobacteria be enteric bacteria that may be coliform or noncoliform .
escherichia coli , a member of gammaproteobacteria , be perhaps the most studied bacterium .

deltaproteobacteria make up a small group able to reduce sulfate or elemental sulfur .
some be scavenger and form myxospore , with multicellular fruiting body .

epsilonproteobacteria make up the small group of proteobacteria .
the genera campylobacter and helicobacter be human pathogen .
four  .  three nonproteobacteria gram - negative bacteria and phototrophic bacteria
 gram - negative nonproteobacteria include the taxa spirochete  the cytophaga , fusobacterium , bacteroides group  planctomycetes  and many representative of phototrophic bacteria .

spirochetes be motile , spiral bacteria with a long , narrow body  - pron - be difficult or impossible to culture .
states of america one  zero  one
no .
one  six
( two  zero  zero  four  )  six  one  seven  six – six  one  eight  one .
two  nine .
r . i . aminov .
“
role of archaea in human disease .
"
frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology three
( two  zero  one  three  )  four  two .
chapter four
 prokaryotic diversity one  eight  nine

several genera of spirochete contain human pathogen that cause such disease as syphilis and lyme disease .

cytophaga , fusobacterium , and bacteroides be classify together as a phylum call the cfb group .
- pron - be rod - shape anaerobic organoheterotroph and avid fermenter .
cytophaga be aquatic bacteria with the glide motility .
fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious disease .
bacteroide be present in vast number in the human gut , most of - pron - be mutualistic but some be pathogenic .

planctomycete be aquatic bacteria that reproduce by bud  - pron - may form large colony , and develop a holdfast .
 phototrophic bacteria be not a taxon but , rather , a group categorize by - pron - ability to use the energy of sunlight .
- pron - include proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria , as well as sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria color purple or green .

sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis , use sulfur compound as donor of electron , whereas nonsulfur bacteria use organic compound ( succinate , malate ) as donor of electron .

some phototrophic bacteria be able to fix nitrogen , provide the usable form of nitrogen to other organism .

cyanobacteria be oxygen - produce bacteria think to have play a critical role in the forming of the earth 's atmosphere .
four  .  four
gram - positive bacteria  gram - positive bacteria be a very large and diverse group of microorganism .
understand - pron - taxonomy and know - pron - unique feature be important for diagnostic and treatment of infectious disease .
 gram - positive bacteria be classify into high g+c gram - positive and low g+c gram - positive bacteria , base on the prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotide in - pron - genome 
actinobacteria be the taxonomic name of the class of high g+c gram - positive bacteria .
this class include the genera actinomyces , arthrobacter , corynebacterium , frankia , gardnerella , micrococcus , mycobacterium , nocardia , propionibacterium , rhodococcus , and streptomyces .
some representative of these genera be use in industry  other be human or animal pathogen .

example of high g+c gram - positive bacteria that be human pathogen include mycobacterium tuberculosis , which cause tuberculosis  m . leprae , which cause leprosy ( hansen 's disease )  and corynebacterium diphtheriae , which cause diphtheria .

clostridia spp .
be low g+c gram - positive bacteria that be generally obligate anaerobe and can form endospore .
pathogen in this genus include c . perfringen ( gas gangrene ) , c . tetani ( tetanus ) , and c . botulinum ( botulism ) .

lactobacillales include the genera enterococcus , lactobacillus , leuconostoc , and streptococcus .
streptococcus be responsible for many human disease , include pharyngitis ( strep throat ) , scarlet fever , rheumatic fever , glomerulonephritis , pneumonia , and other respiratory infection .

bacilli be a taxonomic class of low g+c gram - positive bacteria that include rod - shaped and coccus - shape specie , include the genera bacillus and staphylococcus .
b . anthracis cause anthrax , b . cereus may cause opportunistic infection of the gastrointestinal tract , and s . aureus strain can cause a wide range of infection and disease , many of which be highly resistant to antibiotic .

mycoplasma spp . be very small , pleomorphic low g+c gram - positive bacteria that lack cell wall .
m . pneumoniae cause atypical pneumonia .
four  .  five
deeply branching bacteria 
deeply branch bacteria be phylogenetically the most ancient form of life , be the close to the last universal common ancestor .

deeply branching bacteria include many specie that thrive in extreme environment that be think to resemble condition on earth billion of year ago 
deeply branch bacteria be important for - pron - understanding of evolution  some of - pron - be use in industry four  .  six archaea 
archaea be unicellular , prokaryotic microorganism that differ from bacteria in - pron - genetic , biochemistry ,
one  nine  zero chapter four  prokaryotic diversity
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and ecology .

some archaea be extremophile , live in environment with extremely high or low temperature , or extreme salinity .

only archaea be know to produce methane .
methane - produce archaea be call methanogen .

halophilic archaea prefer a concentration of salt close to saturation and perform photosynthesis use bacteriorhodopsin .

some archaea , base on fossil evidence , be among the old organism on earth .

archaea do not live in great number in human microbiome and be not know to cause disease .
chapter five
the eukaryotes of microbiology figure five  .  one malaria be a disease cause by a eukaryotic parasite transmit to human by mosquito .
micrograph ( leave and center ) show a sporozoite life stage , trophozoite , and a schizont in a blood smear .
on the right be depict a primary defense against mosquito - bear illness like malaria - mosquito netting .
( credit leave  modification of work by ute frevert  credit middle  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit right 
modification of work by tjeerd wiersma ) chapter outline five  .  one unicellular eukaryotic parasites five  .  two parasitic helminths
five  .  three fungi five  .  four algae five  .  five lichens introduction
although bacteria and virus account for a large number of the infectious disease that afflict human , many serious illness be cause by eukaryotic organism .
one example be malaria , which be cause by plasmodium , a eukaryotic organism transmit through mosquito bite .
malaria be a major cause of morbidity ( illness ) and mortality ( death ) that threaten three  .  four billion people worldwide . [ one ]
in severe case , organ failure and blood or metabolic abnormality contribute to medical emergency and sometimes death .
even after initial recovery , relapse may occur year later .
in country where malaria be endemic , the disease represent a major public health challenge that can place a tremendous strain on develop economy .
worldwide , major effort be underway to reduce malaria infection .
effort include the distribution of insecticidetreated bed net and the spraying of pesticide .
researcher be also make progress in - pron - effort to develop effective vaccines . [ two ]
the president 's malaria initiative , start in two  zero  zero  five , support prevention and treatment .
the bill and melinda gates foundation have a large initiative to eliminate malaria .
despite these effort , malaria continue to cause long - term morbidity ( such as intellectual disability in child ) and mortality ( especially in child young than five year ) , so - pron - still have far to go .
one .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
impact of malaria .
” september two  two , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / malaria / malaria_worldwide / impact . html .
accessed january one  eight , two  zero  one  six .
two .
rts , s clinical trials partnership .
"
efficacy and safety of rts , s / as zero  one malaria vaccine with or without a booster dose in infant and child in africa 
final result of a phase three , individually randomise , control trial .
"
the lancet two  three april two  zero  one  five .
doi  http / / dx . doi . org / one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  / s zero  one  four  zero - six  seven  three  six  (  one  five  )  six  zero  seven  two  one - eight .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology one  nine  seven five  .  one unicellular eukaryotic parasites learning objectives

summarize the general characteristic of unicellular eukaryotic parasite 
describe the general life cycle and mode of reproduction in unicellular eukaryotic parasite
 identify challenge associate with classify unicellular eukaryote 
explain
the taxonomic scheme use for unicellular eukaryote  give example of infection cause by unicellular eukaryote eukaryotic microbe be an extraordinarily diverse group , include specie with a wide range of life cycle , morphological specialization , and nutritional need .
although more disease be cause by virus and bacteria than by microscopic eukaryote , these eukaryote be responsible for some disease of great public health importance .
for example , the protozoal disease malaria be responsible for five  eight  four  ,  zero  zero  zero death worldwide ( primarily child in africa ) in two  zero  one  three , accord to the world health organization ( who ) .
the protist parasite giardia cause a diarrheal illness ( giardiasis ) that be easily transmit through contaminate water supply .
in the united states , giardia be the most common human intestinal parasite ( figure five  .  three ) .
although - pron - may seem surprising , parasitic worm be include within the study of microbiology because identification depend on observation of microscopic adult worm or egg .
even in develop country , these worm be important parasite of human and of domestic animal .
there be few fungal pathogen , but these be important cause of illness , as well .
on the other hand , fungus have be part one upon arrive home from school , seven  - year - old sarah complain that a large spot on - pron - arm will not stop itch .
- pron - keep scratch at - pron - , draw the attention of - pron - parent .
look more closely , - pron - see that - pron - be a red circular spot with a raise red edge ( figure five  .  two ) .
the next day , sarah 's parent take - pron - to - pron - doctor , who examine the spot use a wood 's lamp .
a wood 's lamp produce ultraviolet light that cause the spot on sarah 's arm to fluoresce , which confirm what the doctor already suspect  sarah have a case of ringworm .
sarah 's mother be mortify to hear that - pron - daughter have a " worm .
"
how could this happen ?

what be some likely way that sarah may have contract ringworm ?
figure five  .  two ringworm present as a raise , red ring on the skin .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  nine  eight chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five important in produce antimicrobial substance such as penicillin .
in this chapter , - pron - will examine characteristic of protist , worm , and fungi while consider - pron - role in cause disease .
figure five  .  three ( a )
a scan electron micrograph show many giardia parasite in the trophozoite , or feeding stage , in a gerbil intestine .
( b )
an individual trophozoite of g . lamblia , visualize here in a scan electron micrograph .
this waterborne protist cause severe diarrhea when ingest .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
characteristics of protists
the word protist be a historical term that be now use informally to refer to a diverse group of microscopic eukaryotic organism .
- pron - be not consider a formal taxonomic term because the organism - pron - describe do not have a share evolutionary origin .
historically , the protist be informally group into the “ animal - like " protozoan , the “ plantlike " algae , and the " fungus - like " protist such as water mold .
these three group of protist differ greatly in term of - pron - basic characteristic .
for example , algae be photosynthetic organism that can be unicellular or multicellular .
protozoa , on the other hand , be nonphotosynthetic , motile organism that be always unicellular .
other informal term may also be use to describe various group of protist .
for example , microorganism that drift or float in water , move by current , be refer to as plankton .
type of plankton include zooplankton , which be motile and nonphotosynthetic , and phytoplankton , which be photosynthetic .
protozoan inhabit a wide variety of habitat , both aquatic and terrestrial .
many be free - living , while other be parasitic , carry out a life cycle within a host or host and potentially cause illness .
there be also beneficial symbiont that provide metabolic service to - pron - host .
during the feeding and growth part of - pron - life cycle , - pron - be call trophozoite  these feed on small particulate food source such as bacteria .
while some type of protozoa exist exclusively in the trophozoite form , other can develop from trophozoite to an encapsulate cyst stage when environmental condition be too harsh for the trophozoite .
a cyst be a cell with a protective wall , and the process by which a trophozoite become a cyst be call encystment .
when condition become more favorable , these cyst be trigger by environmental cue to become active again through excystment .
one protozoan genus capable of encystment be eimeria , which include some human and animal pathogen .
figure five  .  four illustrate the life cycle of eimeria .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology one  nine  nine figure five  .  four
in the sexual / asexual life cycle of eimeria , oocyst ( inset ) be shed in fece and may cause disease when ingest by a new host .
( credit “ life cycle , "
“ micrograph
" 
modification of work by usda )
protozoans have a variety of reproductive mechanism .
some protozoan reproduce asexually and other reproduce sexually  still other be capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction .
in protozoan , asexual reproduction occur by binary fission , budding , or schizogony .
in schizogony , the nucleus of a cell divide multiple time before the cell divide into many small cell .
the product of schizogony be call merozoite and - pron - be store in structure know as schizont .
protozoans may also reproduce sexually , which increase genetic diversity and can lead to complex life cycle .
protozoan can produce haploid gamete that fuse through syngamy .
however , - pron - can also exchange genetic material by join to exchange dna in a process call conjugation .
this be a different process than the conjugation that occur in bacteria .
the term protist conjugation refer to a true form of eukaryotic sexual reproduction between two cell of different mating type .
- pron - be find in ciliate , a group of protozoan , and be describe later in this subsection .
all protozoan have a plasma membrane , or plasmalemma , and some have band of protein just inside the membrane that add rigidity , form a structure call the pellicle .
some protist , include protozoan , have distinct layer of cytoplasm under the membrane .
in these protist , the outer gel layer ( with microfilament of actin ) be call the ectoplasm .
inside this layer be a sol ( fluid ) region of cytoplasm call the endoplasm .
these structure contribute to complex cell shape in some protozoan , whereas other ( such as amoebas ) have more flexible shape ( figure five  .  five ) .
different group of protozoan have specialize feeding structure .
- pron - may have a specialize structure for take in food through phagocytosis , call a cytostome , and a specialized structure for the exocytosis of waste call a cytoproct .
oral groove lead to cytostome be line with hair - like cilium to sweep in food particle .
protozoan be heterotrophic .
protozoan that be holozoic ingest whole food particle through phagocytosis .
form that be two  zero  zero chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five saprozoic ingest small , soluble food molecule .
many protist have whip - like flagella or hair - like cilia make of microtubule that can be use for locomotion ( figure five  .  five ) .
other protist use cytoplasmic extension know as pseudopodia ( " false foot " ) to attach the cell to a surface  - pron - then allow cytoplasm to flow into the extension , thus move - pron - forward .
protozoan have a variety of unique organelle and sometimes lack organelle find in other cell .
some have contractile vacuole , organelle that can be use to move water out of the cell for osmotic regulation ( salt and water balance )
( figure five  .  five ) .
mitochondria may be absent in parasite or alter to kinetoplastid ( modify mitochondria ) or hydrogenosome ( see unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells for more discussion of these structure ) .
figure five  .  five ( a )
paramecium spp .
have hair - like appendage call cilia for locomotion .
( b ) amoeba spp .
use lobelike pseudopodia to anchor the cell to a solid surface and pull forward .
( c ) euglena spp .
use a whip - like structure call a flagellum to propel the cell .

what be the sequence of event in reproduction by schizogony and what be the cell produce call ?
taxonomy of protists
the protist be a polyphyletic group , mean - pron - lack a share evolutionary origin .
since the current taxonomy be base on evolutionary history ( as determine by biochemistry , morphology , and genetic ) , protist be scatter across many different taxonomic group within the domain eukarya .
eukarya be currently divide into six supergroup that be further divide into subgroup , as illustrate in ( figure five  .  six ) .
in this section , - pron - will primarily be concern with the supergroup
amoebozoa , excavata , and chromalveolata  these supergroup include many protozoan of clinical significance .
the supergroup opisthokonta and rhizaria also include some protozoan , but few of clinical significance .
in addition to protozoan , opisthokonta also include animal and fungus , some of which - pron - will discuss in parasitic helminths and fungi .
some example of the archaeplastida will be discuss in algae .
figure five  .  seven and figure five  .  eight summarize the characteristic of each supergroup and subgroup and list representative of each .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology two  zero  one figure five  .  six
this tree show a propose classification of the domain eukarya base on evolutionary relationship .
currently , the domain eukarya be divide into six supergroup .
within each supergroup be multiple kingdom .
dotted line indicate suggest evolutionary relationship that remain under debate .
two  zero  two chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  seven chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology two  zero  three figure
five  .  eight 
which supergroup contain the clinically significant protist ?
two  zero  four chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
amoebozoa
the supergroup
amoebozoa include protozoan that use amoeboid movement .
actin microfilament produce pseudopodium , into which the remainder of the protoplasm flow , thereby move the organism .
the genus entamoeba include commensal or parasitic specie , include the medically important e . histolytica , which be transmit by cyst in fece and be the primary cause of amoebic dysentery .
the notorious " brain - eat amoeba , " naegleria fowleri , be also classify within the amoebozoa .
this deadly parasite be find in warm , fresh water and cause primary amoebic meningoencephalitis ( pam ) .
another member of this group be acanthamoeba , which can cause keratitis ( corneal inflammation ) and blindness .
the eumycetozoa be an unusual group of organism call slime mold , which have previously be classify as animal , fungus , and plant ( figure five  .  nine ) .
slime mold can be divide into two type  cellular slime mold and plasmodial slime mold .
the cellular slime mold exist as individual amoeboid cell that periodically aggregate into a mobile slug .
the aggregate then form a fruiting body that produce haploid spore .
plasmodial slime mold exist as large , multinucleate amoeboid cell that form reproductive stalk to produce spore that divide into gamete .
one cellular slime mold , dictyostelium discoideum , have be an important study organism for understand cell differentiation , because - pron - have both single - celle and multicelle life stage , with the cell show some degree of differentiation in the multicelle form .
figure five  .  one  zero and figure five  .  one  one illustrate the life cycle of cellular and plasmodial slime mold , respectively .
figure five  .  nine ( a )
the cellular slime mold dictyostelium discoideum can be grow on agar in a petri dish .
in this image , individual amoeboid cell ( visible as small sphere ) be stream together to form an aggregation that be begin to rise in the upper right corner of the image .
the primitively multicellular aggregation consist of individual cell that each have - pron - own nucleus .
( b ) fuligo septica be a plasmodial slime mold .
this brightly color organism consist of a large cell with many nucleus .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  zero  five figure five  .  one  zero
the life cycle of the cellular slime mold dictyostelium discoideum primarily involve individual amoebas but include the formation of a multinucleate plasmodium form from a uninucleate zygote ( the result of the fusion of two individual amoeboid cell ) .
the plasmodium be able to move and form a fruiting body that generate haploid spore .
( credit “ photo
" 
modification of work by “ thatredhead four ” / flickr )
two  zero  six chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
five  .  one  one plasmodial slime mold exist as large multinucleate amoeboid cell that form reproductive stalk to produce spore that divide into gamete .
chromalveolata
the supergroup chromalveolata be unite by similar origin of - pron - member ' plastid and include the apicomplexan , ciliate , diatom , and dinoflagellate , among other group ( - pron - will cover the diatom and dinoflagellate in algae ) .
the apicomplexan be intra - or extracellular parasite that have an apical complex at one end of the cell .
the apical complex be a concentration of organelle , vacuole , and microtubule that allow the parasite to enter host cell ( figure five  .  one  two ) .
apicomplexan have complex life cycle that include an infective sporozoite that undergoes schizogony to make many merozoite ( see the example in figure five  .  four ) .
many be capable of infect a variety of animal cell , from insect to livestock to human , and - pron - life cycle often depend on transmission between multiple host .
the genus plasmodium be an example of this group .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology two  zero  seven figure five  .  one  two ( a )
apicomplexan be parasitic protist .
- pron - have a characteristic apical complex that enable - pron - to infect host cell .
( b )
a colorized electron microscope image of a plasmodium sporozoite .
( credit b  modification of work by ute frevert )
other apicomplexan be also medically important .
cryptosporidium parvum cause intestinal symptom and can cause epidemic diarrhea when the cyst contaminate drinking water .
theileria ( babesia ) microti , transmit by the tick ixodes scapularis , cause recur fever that can be fatal and be become a common transfusion - transmit pathogen in the united states ( theileria and babesia be closely related genera and there be some debate about the good classification ) .
finally , toxoplasma gondii cause toxoplasmosis and can be transmit from cat fece , unwashed fruit and vegetable , or from undercooked meat .
because toxoplasmosis can be associate with serious birth defect , pregnant woman need to be aware of this risk and use caution if - pron - be expose to the fece of potentially infect cat .
a national survey find the frequency of individual with antibody for toxoplasmosis ( and thus who presumably have a current latent infection ) in the united states to be one  one % .
rate be much high in other country , include some develop countries . [ three ]
there be also evidence and a good deal of theorize that the parasite may be responsible for alter infect human ' behavior and personality traits . [ four ]
the ciliate ( ciliaphora ) , also within the chromalveolata , be a large , very diverse group characterize by the presence of cilium on - pron - cell surface .
although the cilia may be use for locomotion , - pron - be often use for feeding , as well , and some form be nonmotile .
balantidium coli ( figure five  .  one  three ) be the only parasitic ciliate that affect human by cause intestinal illness , although - pron - rarely cause serious medical issue except in the immunocompromised ( those have a weaken immune system ) .
perhaps the most familiar ciliate be paramecium , a motile organism with a clearly visible cytostome and cytoproct that be often study in biology laboratory
( figure five  .  one  four ) .
another ciliate , stentor , be sessile and use - pron - cilia for feed ( figure five  .  one  five ) .
generally , these organism have a micronucleus that be diploid , somatic , and use for sexual reproduction by conjugation .
- pron - also have a macronucleus that be derive from the micronucleus  the macronucleus become polyploid ( multiple set of duplicate chromosome ) , and have a reduced set of metabolic gene .
ciliate be able to reproduce through conjugation , in which two cell attach to each other .
in each cell , the diploid micronuclei undergo meiosis , produce eight haploid nucleus each .
then , all but one of the haploid micronuclei and the macronucleus disintegrate  the remain ( haploid ) micronucleus undergoes mitosis .
the two cell then exchange one micronucleus each , which fuse with the remain micronucleus present to form a new , genetically different , three .
j . flegr et al .
“
toxoplasmosis -
a global threat .
correlation of latent toxoplasmosis with specific disease burden in a set of eight  eight country .
"
plos one nine
no .
three
( two  zero  one  four  ) e nine  zero  two  zero  three .
four .
j . flegr .
“ effects of toxoplasma on human behavior .
"
schizophrenia bull three  three , no .
three ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  seven  five  seven – seven  six  zero .
two  zero  eight chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five diploid micronucleus .
the diploid micronucleus undergo two mitotic division , so each cell have four micronuclei , and two of the four combine to form a new macronucleus .
the chromosome in the macronucleus then replicate repeatedly , the macronucleus reach - pron - polyploid state , and the two cell separate .
the two cell be now genetically different from each other and from - pron - previous version .
figure five  .  one  three
this specimen of the ciliate balantidium coli be a trophozoite form isolate from the gut of a primate .
b . coli be the only ciliate capable of parasitize human .
( credit  modification of work by kouassi ryw , mcgraw sw , yao pk , abou - bacar a , brunet j , pesson b , bonfoh b , n'goran ek and candolfi e ) figure five  .  one  four paramecium have a primitive mouth ( call an oral groove ) to ingest food , and an anal pore to excrete - pron - .
contractile vacuole allow the organism to excrete excess water .
cilia enable the organism to move .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  zero  nine figure five  .  one  five
this differential interference contrast micrograph ( magnification  × six  five ) of stentor roeselie show cilia present on the margin of the structure surround the cytostome  the cilia move food particle .
( credit  modification of work by “ picturepest” / flickr )
öomycete have similarity to fungi and be once classify with - pron - .
- pron - be also call water mold .
however , - pron - differ from fungi in several important way .
öomycete have cell wall of cellulose ( unlike the chitinous cell wall of fungi ) and - pron - be generally diploid , whereas the dominant life form of fungi be typically haploid .
phytophthora , the plant pathogen find in the soil that cause the irish potato famine , be classify within this group ( figure five  .  one  six ) .
figure five  .  one  six
a saprobic oomycete , or water mold , engulfs a dead insect .
( credit  modification of work by thomas bresson ) two  one  zero chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five explore the procedure for detect the presence of an apicomplexan in a public water supply , at this ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two detpreapicom ) website .
this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two feedstentor ) show the feeding of stentor .
excavata
the third and final supergroup to be consider in this section be the excavata , which include primitive eukaryote and many parasite with limited metabolic ability .
these organism have complex cell shape and structure , often include a depression on the surface of the cell call an excavate .
the group excavata include the subgroup fornicata , parabasalia , and euglenozoa .
the fornicata lack mitochondria but have flagella .
this group include giardia lamblia ( also know as g . intestinali or g . duodenalis ) , a widespread pathogen that cause diarrheal illness and can be spread through cyst from fece that contaminate water supply ( figure five  .  three ) .
parabasalia be frequent animal endosymbiont  - pron - live in the gut of animal like termite and cockroach .
- pron - have basal body and modify mitochondria ( kinetoplastid ) .
- pron - also have a large , complex cell structure with an undulating membrane and often have many flagellum .
the trichomonad ( a subgroup of the parabasalia ) include pathogen such as trichomonas vaginalis , which cause the human sexually transmit disease trichomoniasis .
trichomoniasis often do not cause symptom in man , but man be able to transmit the infection .
in woman , - pron - cause vaginal discomfort and discharge and may cause complication in pregnancy if leave untreated .
the euglenozoa be common in the environment and include photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic specie .
member of the genus euglena be typically not pathogenic .
- pron - cell have two flagellum , a pellicle , a stigma ( eyespot ) to sense light , and chloroplast for photosynthesis ( figure five  .  one  seven ) .
the pellicle of euglena be make of a series of protein band surround the cell  - pron - support the cell membrane and give the cell shape .
the euglenozoa also include the trypanosome , which be parasitic pathogen .
the genus trypanosoma include t . brucei , which cause african trypanosomiasis ( african sleep sickness and t . cruzi , which cause american trypanosomiasis ( chagas disease ) .
these tropical disease be spread by insect bite .
in african sleep sickness , t . brucei colonize the blood and the brain after be transmit via the bite of a tsetse fly ( glossina spp . )
( figure five  .  one  eight ) .
the early symptom include confusion , difficulty sleep , and lack of coordination .
leave untreated , - pron - be fatal .
figure five  .  one  seven ( a )
this illustration of a euglena show the characteristic structure , such as the stigma and flagellum .
( b )
the pellicle , under the cell membrane , give the cell - pron - distinctive shape and be visible in this image as delicate parallel striation over the surface of the entire cell ( especially visible over the grey contractile vacuole ) .
( credit a  modification of work by claudio miklos  credit b  modification of work by david shykind ) link to learning chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  one  one figure five  .  one  eight trypanosoma brucei , the causative agent of african trypanosomiasis , spend part of - pron - life cycle in the tsetse fly and part in human .
( credit " illustration
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ photo
"  dpdx / center for disease control and prevention ) chagas ' disease originate and be most common in latin america .
the disease be transmit by triatoma spp .
, insect often call “ kiss bug , " and affect either the heart tissue or tissue of the digestive system .
untreated case can eventually lead to heart failure or significant digestive or neurological disorder .
the genus leishmania include trypanosomes that cause disfigure skin disease and sometimes systemic illness as well .
neglect parasites the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) be responsible for identify public health priority in the united states and develop strategy to address area of concern .
as part of this mandate , the eye on ethics two  one  two chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cdc have officially identify five parasitic disease - pron - consider to have be neglect ( i . e . , not adequately study ) .
these neglect parasitic infection ( npis ) include toxoplasmosis , chagas disease , toxocariasis ( a nematode infection transmit primarily by infect dog ) , cysticercosis ( a disease cause by a tissue infection of the tapeworm taenia solium ) , and trichomoniasis ( a sexually transmit disease cause by the parabasalid trichomonas vaginalis ) .
the decision to name these specific disease as npi mean that the cdc will devote resource toward improve awareness and develop well diagnostic testing and treatment through study of available datum .
the cdc may also advise on treatment of these disease and assist in the distribution of medication that may otherwise be difficult to obtain . [ five ]
of course , the cdc do not have unlimited resource , so by prioritize these five disease , - pron - be effectively deprioritize other .
give that many americans have never hear of many of these npi , - pron - be fair to ask what criteria the cdc use in prioritize disease .
accord to the cdc , the factor consider be the number of people infect , the severity of the illness , and whether the illness can be treat or prevent .
although several of these npi may seem to be more common outside the united states , the cdc argue that many case in the united states likely go undiagnosed and untreated because so little be know about these diseases . [ six ]
what criterion should be consider when prioritize disease for purpose of funding or research ?
be those identify by the cdc reasonable ?
what other factor could be consider ?
should government agency like the cdc have the same criterion as private pharmaceutical research lab ?
what be the ethical implication of deprioritize other potentially neglect parasitic disease such as leishmaniasis ?
five  .  two parasitic helminths learning objectives
 explain why - pron - include the study of parasitic worm within the discipline of microbiology
 compare the basic morphology of the major group of parasitic helminthe
 describe the characteristic of parasitic nematode , and give an example of infective egg and infective larvae  describe the characteristic of parasitic trematode and cestode , and give example of each 
identify example of the primary cause of infection due to nematode , trematode , and cestode 
classify parasitic worm accord to major group
parasitic helminth be animal that be often include within the study of microbiology because many specie of these worm be identify by - pron - microscopic egg and larvae .
there be two major group of parasitic helminth  the roundworm ( nematoda ) and flatworm ( platyhelminthes ) .
of the many specie that exist in these group , about half be parasitic and some be important human pathogen .
as animal , - pron - be multicellular and have organ system .
however , the parasitic specie often have limit digestive tract , nervous system , and locomotor ability .
parasitic form may have complex reproductive cycle with several different life stage and more than one type of host .
some be monoecious , have both male and female reproductive organ in a single individual , while other be dioecious , each have either male or female reproductive organ .
five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ neglect parasitic infections ( npi ) in the united states .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites /
npi / .
last update july one  zero , two  zero  one  four .
six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
fact sheet  neglect parasitic infections in the united states .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / parasite / resource / pdf / npi_factsheet . pdf chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  one  three nematoda ( roundworm )
phylum nematoda ( the roundworm ) be a diverse group contain more than one  five  ,  zero  zero  zero specie , of which several be important human parasite ( figure five  .  one  nine ) .
these unsegmented worm have a full digestive system even when parasitic .
some be common intestinal parasite , and - pron - egg can sometimes be identify in fece or around the anus of infect individual .
ascaris lumbricoide be the large nematode intestinal parasite find in human  female may reach length great than one meter .
a . lumbricoide be also very widespread , even in developed nation , although - pron - be now a relatively uncommon problem in the united states .
- pron - may cause symptom range from relatively mild ( such as a cough and mild abdominal pain ) to severe ( such as intestinal blockage and impair growth ) .
figure five  .  one  nine
a micrograph of the nematode enterobius vermicularis , also know as the pinworm .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
of all nematode infection in the united states , pinworm ( cause by enterobius vermicularis ) be the most common .
pinworm cause sleeplessness and itch around the anus , where the female worm lie - pron - egg during the night .
toxocara cani and t . cati be nematode find in dog and cat , respectively , that can be transmit to human , cause toxocariasis .
antibody to these parasite have be find in approximately one  three  .  nine % of the u . s . population , suggest that exposure be common . [ seven ]
infection can cause larval migran , which can result in vision loss and eye inflammation , or fever , fatigue , coughing , and abdominal pain , depend on whether the organism infect the eye or the viscera .
another common nematode infection be hookworm , which be cause by necator americanus ( the new world or north american hookworm ) and ancylostoma duodenale ( the old world hookworm ) .
symptom of hookworm infection can include abdominal pain , diarrhea , loss of appetite , weight loss , fatigue , and anemia .
trichinellosis , also call trichinosis , cause by trichinella spiralis , be contract by consume undercooked meat , which release the larvae and allow - pron - to encyst in muscle .
infection can cause fever , muscle pain , and digestive system problem  severe infection can lead to lack of coordination , breathing and heart problem , and even death .
finally , heartworm in dog and other animal be cause by the nematode dirofilaria immitis , which be transmit by mosquito .
symptom include fatigue and cough  when leave untreated , death may result .
part two
the physician explain to sarah 's mother that ringworm can be transfer between people through touch .
clinical focus seven .
won k , kruszon - moran d , schantz p , jones j . “ national seroprevalence and risk factor for zoonotic toxocara spp .
infection .
"
in  abstract of the five  six th american society of tropical medicine and hygiene  philadelphia , pennsylvania  two  zero  zero  seven nov four - eight . two  one  four chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five " - pron - ' common in school child , because - pron - often come in close contact with each other , but anyone can become infected , " - pron - add .
“
because - pron - can transfer - pron - through object , locker room and public pool be also a potential source of infection .
- pron - ' very common among wrestler and athlete in other contact sport .
"
look very uncomfortable , sarah say to - pron - mother
“ i want this worm out of - pron - .
"
the doctor laugh and say , “ sarah , - pron - be in luck because ringworm be just a name  - pron - be not an actual worm .
- pron - have nothing wriggle around under - pron - skin .
"
“
then what be - pron - ?
" ask sarah .

what type of pathogen cause ringworm ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .

what be the most common nematode infection in the united states ?
platyhelminths ( flatworms ) phylum platyhelminthes ( the platyhelminth ) be flatworm .
this group include the fluke , tapeworm , and the turbellarian , which include planarian .
the fluke and tapeworm be medically important parasite ( figure five  .  two  zero ) .
the fluke ( trematode ) be nonsegmente flatworm that have an oral sucker ( figure five  .  two  one ) ( and sometimes a second ventral sucker ) and attach to the inner wall of intestine , lung , large blood vessel , or the liver .
trematode have complex life cycle , often with multiple host .
several important example be the liver fluke ( clonorchis and opisthorchis ) , the intestinal fluke ( fasciolopsis buski ) , and the oriental lung fluke ( paragonimus westermani ) .
schistosomiasis be a serious parasitic disease , consider second in the scale of - pron - impact on human population only to malaria .
the parasite schistosoma mansoni , s . haematobium , and s . japonicum , which be find in freshwater snail , be responsible for schistosomiasis ( figure five  .  two  two ) .
immature form burrow through the skin into the blood .
- pron - migrate to the lung , then to the liver and , later , other organ .
symptom include anemia , malnutrition , fever , abdominal pain , fluid buildup , and sometimes death .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  one  five figure five  .  two  zero phylum platyhelminthes be divide into four class .
( a ) class turbellaria include the bedford 's flatworm ( pseudobiceros bedfordi ) , which be about eight – one  zero cm long .
( b )
the parasitic class monogenea include dactylogyrus spp .
worm in this genus be commonly call gill fluke .
the speciman picture here be about zero  .  two mm long and have two anchor , indicate by arrow , that - pron - use to latch onto the gill of host fish .
( c )
the trematoda class include the common liver fluke fasciola hepatica and the giant liver fluke fascioloides magna
( right ) .
the f . magna speciman show here be about seven cm long .
( d ) class cestoda include tapeworm such as taenia saginata , which infect both cattle and human and can reach length of four – one  zero meter  the speciman show here be about four meter long .
( credit c  modification of work by “ flukeman” / wikimedia commons ) two  one  six chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  two  one ( a )
the oral sucker be visible on the anterior end of this liver fluke , opisthorchis viverrini .
( b )
this micrograph show the scolex of the cestode taenia solium , also know as the pork tapeworm .
the visible sucker and hook allow the worm to attach - pron - to the inner wall of the intestine .
( credit a  modification of work by sripa b , kaewkes s , sithithaworn p , mairiang e , laha t , and smout m  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
the other medically important group of platyhelminth be commonly know as tapeworm ( cestode ) and be segment flatworm that may have sucker or hook at the scolex ( head region )
( figure five  .  two  one ) .
tapeworm use these sucker or hook to attach to the wall of the small intestine .
the body of the worm be make up of segment call proglottid that contain reproductive structure  these detach when the gamete be fertilize , release gravid proglottid with egg .
tapeworm often have an intermediate host that consume the egg , which then hatch into a larval form call an oncosphere .
the oncosphere migrate to a particular tissue or organ in the intermediate host , where - pron - form cysticercus .
after be eat by the definitive host , the cysticercus develop into adult tapeworm in the host ' s digestive system ( figure five  .  two  three ) .
taenia saginata ( the beef tapeworm ) and t . solium ( the pork tapeworm ) enter human through ingestion of undercooked , contaminate meat .
the adult worm develop and reside in the intestine , but the larval stage may migrate and be find in other body location such as skeletal and smooth muscle .
the beef tapeworm be relatively benign , although - pron - can cause digestive problem and , occasionally , allergic reaction .
the pork tapeworm can cause more serious problem when the larvae leave the intestine and colonize other tissue , include those of the central nervous system .
diphylobothrium latum be the large human tapeworm and can be ingest in undercooked fish .
- pron - can grow to a length of one  five meter .
echinococcus granulosus , the dog tapeworm , can parasitize human and use dog as an important host .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  one  seven figure five  .  two  two
the life cycle of schistosoma spp . include several specie of water snail , which serve as secondary host .
the parasite be transmit to human through contact with contaminated water and take up residence in the vein of the digestive system .
eggs escape the host in the urine or fece and infect a snail to complete the life cycle .
( credit " illustration
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ step three photo
" 
modification of work by fred a . lewis , yung - san liang , nithya raghavan and matty knight )
two  one  eight chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  two  three life cycle of a tapeworm .
( credit " illustration
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ step three micrograph
" 
modification of work by american society for microbiology )

what group of medically important flatworm be segment and what group be unsegmented ?
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology two  one  nine food for worms ?
for resident of temperate , developed country , - pron - may be difficult to imagine just how common helminth infection be in the human population .
in fact , - pron - be quite common and even occur frequently in the united states .
worldwide , approximately eight  zero  seven – one  ,  two  two  one million people be infect with ascaris lumbricoide ( perhaps one - sixth of the human population ) and far more be infect if all nematode specie be considered . [ eight ] rate of infection be relatively high even in industrialized nation .
approximately six  zero  four – seven  nine  five million people be infect with whipworm ( trichuris ) worldwide ( trichuris can also infect dog ) , and five  seven  six – seven  four  zero million people be infect with hookworm (
necator americanus and ancylostoma duodenale ) . [ nine ]
toxocara , a nematode parasite of dog and cat , be also able to infect human .
- pron - be widespread in the united states , with about one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero symptomatic case annually .
however , one study find one  four % of the population ( more than four  zero million americans ) be seropositive , mean - pron - have be expose to the parasite at one time .
more than two  zero  zero million people have schistosomiasis worldwide .
most of the world health organization ( who ) neglect tropical disease be helminth .
in some case , helminth may cause subclinical illness , mean the symptom be so mild that that - pron - go unnoticed .
in other case , the effect may be more severe or chronic , lead to fluid accumulation and organ damage .
with so many people affect , these parasite constitute a major global public health concern .
eradicate the guinea worm dracunculiasis , or guinea worm disease , be cause by a nematode call dracunculus medinensis .
when people consume contaminate water , water flea ( small crustacean ) contain the nematode larvae may be ingest .
these larvae migrate out of the intestine , mate , and move through the body until female eventually emerge ( generally through the foot ) .
while guinea worm disease be rarely fatal , - pron - be extremely painful and can be accompany by secondary infection and edema ( figure five  .  two  four ) .
figure five  .  two  four
the guinea worm can be remove from a leg vein of an infect person by gradually wind - pron - around a stick , like this matchstick .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
an eradication campaign lead by who , the cdc , the united nations children 's fund ( unicef ) , and the carter center ( found by former u . s . president jimmy carter ) have be extremely successful in reduce case of dracunculiasis .
this have be possible because diagnosis be straightforward , there be an inexpensive method of control , there be no animal reservoir , the water flea be not airborne ( - pron - be restrict to still water ) , micro connections micro connections eight .
fenwick , a . “
the global burden of neglect tropical disease .
"
public health one  two  six no .  three ( mar two  zero  one  two )  two  three  three – six .
nine .
de silva , n . , et .
al .
( two  zero  zero  three ) .
“ soil - transmit helminth infection  update the global picture " .
trend in parasitology one  nine ( december two  zero  zero  three ) 
five  four  seven – five  one .
two  two  zero
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the disease be geographically limited , and there have be a commitment from the government involve .
additionally , no vaccine or medication be require for treatment and prevention .
in one  nine  eight  six , three  .  five million people be estimate to be affect .
after the eradication campaign , which include help people in affect area learn to filter water with cloth , only four country continue to report the disease ( chad , mali , south sudan , and ethiopia ) with a total of one  two  six case report to who in two  zero  one  four  . [ one  zero ]
five  .  three fungi learning objectives
 explain why the study of fungi such as yeast and mold be within the discipline of microbiology
 describe the unique characteristic of fungi

describe example of asexual and sexual reproduction of fungi
 compare the major group of fungi in this chapter , and give example of each 
identify example of the primary cause of infection due to yeast and mold 
identify example of toxin - produce fungi  classify fungal organism accord to major group the fungi comprise a diverse group of organism that be heterotrophic and typically saprozoic .
in addition to the well - know macroscopic fungi ( such as mushroom and mold ) , many unicellular yeast and spore of macroscopic fungi be microscopic .
for this reason , fungus be include within the field of microbiology .
fungi be important to human in a variety of way .
both microscopic and macroscopic fungi have medical relevance , with some pathogenic specie that can cause mycose ( illness cause by fungi ) .
some pathogenic fungi be opportunistic , mean that - pron - mainly cause infection when the host 's immune defense be compromise and do not normally cause illness in healthy individual .
fungus be important in other way .
- pron - act as decomposer in the environment , and - pron - be critical for the production of certain food such as cheese .
fungi be also major source of antibiotic , such as penicillin from the fungus penicillium .
characteristic of fungi fungi have well - define characteristic that set - pron - apart from other organism .
most multicellular fungal body , commonly call mold , be make up of filament call hypha .
hypha can form a tangled network call a mycelium and form the thallus ( body ) of fleshy fungi .
hypha that have wall between the cell be call septate hypha  hyphae that lack wall and cell membrane between the cell be call nonseptate or coenocytic hypha ) .
( figure five  .  two  five ) .
one  zero .
world health organization .
“
south sudan report zero cases of guinea - worm disease for seventh consecutive month .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / dracunculiasis / no_new_case_for_seventh_consecutive_month / en / . accessed may two , two  zero  one  six .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology two  two  one figure five  .  two  five multicellular fungi ( mold ) form hypha , which may be septate or nonseptate .
unicellular fungi ( yeast ) cell form pseudohyphae from individual yeast cell .
in contrast to mold , yeast be unicellular fungi .
the bud yeast reproduce asexually by bud off a small daughter cell  the result cell may sometimes stick together as a short chain or pseudohypha ( figure five  .  two  five ) .
candida albican be a common yeast that form pseudohyphae  - pron - be associate with various infection in human , include vaginal yeast infection , oral thrush , and candidiasis of the skin .
some fungi be dimorphic , have more than one appearance during - pron - life cycle .
these dimorphic fungi may be able to appear as yeast or mold , which can be important for infectivity .
- pron - be capable of change - pron - appearance in response to environmental change such as nutrient availability or fluctuation in temperature , grow as a mold , for example , at two  five ° c ( seven  seven ° f ) , and as yeast cell at three  seven ° c ( nine  eight  .  six ° f ) .
this ability help dimorphic fungi to survive in diverse environment .
histoplasma capsulatum , the pathogen that cause histoplasmosis , a lung infection , be an example of a dimorphic fungus ( figure five  .  two  six ) .
two  two  two chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  two  six histoplasma capsulatum be a dimorphic fungus that grow in soil expose to bird fece or bat fece ( guano ) ( top left ) .
- pron - can change form to survive at different temperature .
in the outdoor , - pron - typically grow as a mycelium ( as show in the micrograph , bottom leave ) , but when the spore be inhale ( right ) , - pron - respond to the high internal temperature of the body ( three  seven ° c [ nine  eight  .  six ° f ] ) by turn into a yeast that can multiply in the lung , cause the chronic lung disease histoplasmosis .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
there be notable unique feature in fungal cell wall and membrane .
fungal cell wall contain chitin , as oppose to the cellulose find in the cell wall of plant and many protist .
additionally , whereas animal have cholesterol in - pron - cell membrane , fungal cell membrane have different sterol call ergosterol .
ergosterol be often exploit as target for antifungal drug .
fungal life cycle be unique and complex .
fungus reproduce sexually either through cross - or self - fertilization .
haploid fungi form hypha that have gamete at the tip .
two different mating type ( represent as “ + type " and “ – type " ) be involve .
the cytoplasm of the + and – type gamete fuse ( in an event call plasmogamy ) , produce a cell with two distinct nucleus ( a dikaryotic cell ) .
later , the nucleus fuse ( in an event call karyogamy ) to create a diploid zygote .
the zygote undergoes meiosis to form spore that germinate to start the haploid stage , which eventually create more haploid mycelium ( figure five  .  two  seven ) .
depend on the taxonomic group , these sexually produce spore be know as zygospore ( in zygomycota ) , ascospore ( in ascomycota ) , or basidiospore ( in basidiomycota )
( figure five  .  two  eight ) .
fungi may also exhibit asexual reproduction by mitosis , mitosis with budding , fragmentation of hypha , and formation of asexual spore by mitosis .
these spore be specialized cell that , depend on the organism , may have unique characteristic for survival , reproduction , and dispersal .
fungi exhibit several type of asexual spore and these can be important in classification .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology two  two  three figure five  .  two  seven zygomycetes have sexual and asexual life cycle .
in the sexual life cycle , + and – mating type conjugate to form a zygosporangium .
two  two  four chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  two  eight
these image show asexually produce spore .
( a )
this brightfield
micrograph show the release of spore from a sporangium at the end of a hypha call a sporangiophore .
the organism be a mucor sp .
fungus , a mold often find indoor .
( b ) sporangia grow at the end of stalk , which appear as the white fuzz see on this bread mold , rhizopus stolonifer .
the tip of bread mold be the dark , spore - contain sporangia .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit
b right  modification of work by “ andrew” / flickr )

be a dimorphic fungus a yeast or a mold ?
explain .
fungal diversity
the fungi be very diverse , comprise seven major group .
not all of the seven group contain pathogen .
some of these group be generally associate with plant and include plant pathogen .
for example , urediniomycetes and ustilagomycetes include the plant rust and smut , respectively .
these form reddish or dark mass , respectively , on plant as rust ( red ) or smut ( dark ) .
some specie have substantial economic impact because of - pron - ability to reduce crop yield .
glomeromycota include the mycorrhizal fungi , important symbiont with plant root that can promote plant growth by act like an extend root system .
the glomeromycota be obligate symbiont , mean that - pron - can only survive when associate with plant root  the fungi receive carbohydrate from the plant and the plant benefit from the increase ability to take up nutrient and mineral from the soil .
the chytridiomycetes ( chytrid ) be small fungi , but be extremely ecologically important .
chytrid be generally aquatic and have flagellate , motile gamete  specific type be implicate in amphibian decline around the world .
because of - pron - medical importance , - pron - will focus on zygomycota , ascomycota , basidiomycota , and microsporidia .
figure five  .  three  three summarize the characteristic of these medically important group of fungi .
the zygomycota ( zygomycete ) be mainly saprophyte with coenocytic hypha and haploid nucleus .
- pron - use sporangiospore for asexual reproduction .
the group name come from the zygospore that - pron - use for sexual reproduction ( figure five  .  two  seven ) , which have hard wall form from the fusion of reproductive cell from two individual .
zygomycete be important for food science and as crop pathogen .
one example be rhizopus stolonifer ( figure five  .  two  eight ) , an important bread mold that also cause rice seedling blight .
mucor be a genus of fungi that can potentially cause necrotize infection in human , although most specie be intolerant of temperature find in mammalian body ( figure five  .  two  eight ) .
the ascomycota include fungi that be use as food ( edible mushroom , morel , and truffle ) , other that be common cause of food spoilage ( bread mold and plant pathogen ) , and still other that be human pathogen .
ascomycota may have septate hypha and cup - shape fruiting body call ascocarps .
some genera of ascomycota use sexually produce ascospore as well as asexual spore call conidium , but sexual phase have not be discover or describe for other .
some produce an ascus contain ascospore within an ascocarp ( figure five  .  two  nine ) .
example of the ascomycota include several bread mold and minor pathogen , as well as specie capable of cause chapter five 
the eukaryotes of microbiology two  two  five more serious mycose .
specie in the genus aspergillus be important cause of allergy and infection , and be useful in research and in the production of certain ferment alcoholic beverage such as japanese sake .
the fungus aspergillus flavus , a contaminant of nuts and stored grain , produce an aflatoxin that be both a toxin and the most potent know natural carcinogen .
neurospora crassa be of particular use in genetic research because the spore produce by meiosis be keep inside the ascus in a row that reflect the cell division that produce - pron - , give a direct view of segregation and assortment of gene ( figure five  .  three  zero ) .
penicillium produce the antibiotic penicillin ( figure five  .  two  nine ) .
many specie of ascomycete be medically important .
a large number of specie in the genera trichophyton , microsporum , and epidermophyton be dermatophyte , pathogenic fungi capable of cause skin infection such as athlete 's foot , jock itch , and ringworm .
blastomyce dermatitidis be a dimorphic fungus that can cause blastomycosis , a respiratory infection that , if leave untreated , can become disseminated to other body site , sometimes lead to death .
another important respiratory pathogen be the dimorphic fungus histoplasma capsulatum ( figure five  .  two  six ) , which be associate with bird and bat in the ohio and mississippi river valley .
coccidioide immitis cause the serious lung disease valley fever .
candida albican , the most common cause of vaginal and other yeast infection , be also an ascomycete fungus  - pron - be a part of the normal microbiota of the skin , intestine , genital tract , and ear ( figure five  .  two  nine ) .
ascomycete also cause plant disease , include ergot infection , dutch elm disease , and powdery mildew .
saccharomyce yeast , include the baker 's yeast s . cerevisiae , be unicellular ascomycete with haploid and diploid stage ( figure five  .  three  one ) .
this and other saccharomyces specie be use for brew beer .
figure five  .  two  nine
( a )
this brightfield micrograph show ascospore be release from ascus in the fungus talaromyces flavus var .
flavus .
( b )
this electron micrograph show the conidium ( spore ) bear on the conidiophore of aspergillus , a type of toxic fungus find mostly in soil and plant .
( c )
this brightfield micrograph show the yeast candida albican , the causative agent of candidiasis and thrush .
( credit a , b , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) figure five  .  three  zero
these ascospore , line up within an ascus , be produce sexually .
( credit  peter g . werner ) two  two  six chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  three  one
the life cycle of an ascomycete be characterize by the production of ascus during the sexual phase .
the haploid phase be the predominant phase of the life cycle .
the basidiomycota ( basidiomycete ) be fungi that have basidia ( club - shape structure ) that produce basidiospore ( spore produce through bud ) within fruit body call basidiocarps ( figure five  .  three  two ) .
- pron - be important as decomposer and as food .
this group include rust , stinkhorn , puffball , and mushroom .
several specie be of particular importance .
cryptococcus neoforman , a fungus commonly find as a yeast in the environment , can cause serious lung infection when inhale by individual with weaken immune system .
the edible meadow mushroom , agricus campestris , be a basidiomycete , as be the poisonous mushroom amanita phalloide , know as the death cap .
the deadly toxin produce by a . phalloide have be use to study transcription .
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  two  seven figure five  .  three  two
the life cycle of a basidiomycete alternate a haploid generation with a prolong stage in which two nucleus ( dikaryon ) be present in the hypha .
finally , the microsporidia be unicellular fungi that be obligate intracellular parasite .
- pron - lack mitochondria , peroxisome , and centriole , but - pron - spore release a unique polar tubule that pierce the host cell membrane to allow the fungus to gain entry into the cell .
a number of microsporidia be human pathogen , and infection with microsporidia be call microsporidiosis .
one pathogenic specie be enterocystozoan bieneusi , which can cause symptom such as diarrhea , cholecystitis ( inflammation of the gall bladder ) , and in rare case , respiratory illness .
two  two  eight chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  three  three ( credit "
ascomycota
"
 modification of work by dr . lucille georg , centers for disease control and prevention  credit “
microsporidia " 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology two  two  nine

which group of fungi appear to be associate with the great number of human disease ?
eukaryotic pathogen in eukaryotic hosts
when - pron - think about antimicrobial medication , antibiotic such as penicillin often come to mind .
penicillin and related antibiotic interfere with the synthesis of peptidoglycan cell wall , which effectively target bacterial cell .
these antibiotic be useful because human ( like all eukaryote ) do not have peptidoglycan cell wall .
develop medication that be effective against eukaryotic cell but not harmful to human cell be more difficult .
despite huge morphological difference , the cell of human , fungus , and protist be similar in term of - pron - ribosome , cytoskeleton , and cell membrane .
as a result , - pron - be more challenging to develop medication that target protozoan and fungi in the same way that antibiotic target prokaryote .
fungicide have relatively limited mode of action .
because fungi have ergosterol ( instead of cholesterol ) in - pron - cell membrane , the different enzyme involve in sterol production can be a target of some medication .
the azole and morpholine fungicide interfere with the synthesis of membrane sterol .
these be use widely in agriculture ( fenpropimorph ) and clinically ( e . g . , miconazole ) .
some antifungal medication target the chitin cell wall of fungi .
despite the success of these compound in target fungi , antifungal medication for systemic infection still tend to have more toxic side effect than antibiotic for bacteria .
part three
sarah be relieve the ringworm be not an actual worm , but want to know what - pron - really be .
the physician explain that ringworm be a fungus .
- pron - tell - pron - that - pron - will not see mushroom pop out of - pron - skin , because this fungus be more like the invisible part of a mushroom that hide in the soil .
- pron - reassure - pron - that - pron - be go to get the fungus out of - pron - too .
the doctor clean and then carefully scrap the lesion to place a specimen on a slide .
by look at - pron - under a microscope , the physician be able to confirm that a fungal infection be responsible for sarah 's lesion .
in figure five  .  three  four , - pron - be possible to see macro - and microconidia in trichophyton rubrum .
cell wall be also visible .
even if the pathogen resemble a helminth under the microscope , the presence of cell wall would rule out the possibility because animal cell lack cell wall .
the doctor prescribe an antifungal cream for sarah 's mother to apply to the ringworm .
sarah 's mother ask , "
what should - pron - do
if - pron - do not go away ?
"

can all form of ringworm be treat with the same antifungal medication ?
micro connections clinical focus two  three  zero chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  three  four
this micrograph show hypha ( macroconidium ) and microconidia of trichophyton rubrum , a dermatophyte responsible for fungal infection of the skin .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
five  .  four algae learning objectives
 explain why algae be include within the discipline of microbiology
 describe the unique characteristic of algae 
identify example of toxin - produce algae 
compare the major group of algae in this chapter , and give example of each  classify algal organism accord to major group
the algae be autotrophic protist that can be unicellular or multicellular .
these organism be find in the supergroup chromalveolata ( dinoflagellate , diatom , golden algae , and brown algae ) and archaeplastida ( red algae and green algae ) .
- pron - be important ecologically and environmentally because - pron - be responsible for the production of approximately seven  zero % of the oxygen and organic matter in aquatic environment .
some type of algae , even those that be microscopic , be regularly eat by human and other animal .
additionally , algae be the source for agar , agarose , and carrageenan , solidify agent use in laboratory and in food production .
although algae be typically not pathogenic , some produce toxin .
harmful algal bloom , which occur when algae grow quickly and produce dense population , can produce high concentration of toxin that impair liver and nervous - system function in aquatic animal and human .
like protozoan , algae often have complex cell structure .
for instance , algal cell can have one or more chloroplast that contain structure call pyrenoid to synthesize and store starch .
the chloroplast - pron - differ in - pron - number of membrane , indicative of secondary or rare tertiary endosymbiotic event .
primary chloroplast have two membrane - one from the original cyanobacteria that the ancestral eukaryotic cell engulf , and one from the plasma membrane of the engulf cell .
chloroplast in some lineage appear to have result from secondary endosymbiosis , in which another cell engulf a green or red algal cell that already have a primary chloroplast within - pron - .
the engulf cell destroy everything except the chloroplast and possibly the cell membrane of - pron - original cell , leave three or four membrane around the chloroplast .
different algal group have different pigment , which be chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology two  three  one reflect in common name such as red algae , brown algae , and green algae .
some algae , the seaweed , be macroscopic and may be confuse with plant .
seaweed can be red , brown , or green , depend on - pron - photosynthetic pigment .
green algae , in particular , share some important similarity with land plant  however , there be also important distinction .
for example , seaweed do not have true tissue or organ like plant do .
additionally , seaweed do not have a waxy cuticle to prevent desiccation .
algae can also be confuse with cyanobacteria , photosynthetic bacteria that bear a resemblance to algae  however , cyanobacteria be prokaryote ( see nonproteobacteria gram - negative bacteria and phototrophic bacteria ) .
algae have a variety of life cycle .
reproduction may be asexual by mitosis or sexual use gamete .
algal diversity
although the algae and protozoa be formerly separate taxonomically , - pron - be now mix into supergroup .
the algae be classify within the chromalveolata and the archaeplastida .
although the euglenozoa ( within the supergroup excavata ) include photosynthetic organism , these be not consider algae because - pron - feed and be motile .
the dinoflagellate and stramenopile fall within the chromalveolata .
the dinoflagellate be mostly marine organism and be an important component of plankton .
- pron - have a variety of nutritional type and may be phototrophic , heterotrophic , or mixotrophic .
those that be photosynthetic use chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c two , and other photosynthetic pigment ( figure five  .  three  five ) .
- pron - generally have two flagellum , cause - pron - to whirl ( in fact , the name dinoflagellate come from the greek word for " whirl "  dini ) .
some have cellulose plate form a hard outer covering , or theca , as armor .
additionally , some dinoflagellate produce neurotoxin that can cause paralysis in human or fish .
exposure can occur through contact with water contain the dinoflagellate toxin or by feed on organism that have eat dinoflagellate .
when a population of dinoflagellate become particularly dense , a red tide ( a type of harmful algal bloom ) can occur .
red tide cause harm to marine life and to human who consume contaminate marine life .
major toxin producer include gonyaulax and alexandrium , both of which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning .
another species , pfiesteria piscicida , be know as a fish killer because , at certain part of - pron - life cycle , - pron - can produce toxin harmful to fish and - pron - appear to be responsible for a suite of symptom , include memory loss and confusion , in human expose to water contain the specie .
figure five  .  three  five
the dinoflagellate exhibit great diversity in shape .
many be encase in cellulose armor and have two flagellum that fit in groove between the plate .
movement of these two perpendicular flagella cause a spinning motion .
( credit  modification of work by csiro )
the stramenopile include the golden algae ( chrysophyta ) , the brown algae ( phaeophyta ) , and the diatom ( bacillariophyta ) .
stramenopile have chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c one  / c two , and fucoxanthin as photosynthetic pigment .
- pron - storage carbohydrate be chrysolaminarin .
while some lack cell wall , other have scale .
diatom have two  three  two chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five flagella and frustule , which be outer cell wall of crystallized silica  - pron - fossilize remain be use to produce diatomaceous earth , which have a range of use such as filtration and insulation .
additionally , diatom can reproduce sexually or asexually .
one diatom genus , pseudo - nitzschia , be know to be associate with harmful algal bloom .
brown algae ( phaeophyta ) be multicellular marine seaweed .
some can be extremely large , such as the giant kelp ( laminaria ) .
- pron - have leaf - like blade , stalk , and structure call holdfast that be use to attach to substrate .
however , these be not true leaf , stem , or root ( figure five  .  three  six ) .
- pron - photosynthetic pigment be chlorophyll a , chlorophyll c , β - carotene , and fucoxanthine .
- pron - use laminarin as a storage carbohydrate .
the archaeplastid include the green algae ( chlorophyta ) , the red algae ( rhodophyta ) , another group of green algae ( charophyta ) , and the land plant .
the charaphyta be the most similar to land plant because - pron - share a mechanism of cell division and an important biochemical pathway , among other trait that the other group do not have .
like land plant , the charophyta and chlorophyta have chlorophyll a and chlorophyll
b as photosynthetic pigment , cellulose cell wall , and starch as a carbohydrate storage molecule .
chlamydomonas be a green alga that have a single large chloroplast , two flagellum , and a stigma ( eyespot )  - pron - be important in molecular biology research ( figure five  .  three  seven ) .
chlorella be a nonmotile , large , unicellular alga , and acetabularia be an even large unicellular green alga .
the size of these organism challenge the idea that all cell be small , and - pron - have be use in genetic research since joachim hämmerling ( one  nine  zero  one – one  nine  eight  zero ) begin to work with - pron - in one  nine  four  three .
volvox be a colonial , unicellular alga ( figure five  .  three  seven ) .
a large , multicellular green alga be ulva , also know as the sea lettuce because of - pron - large , edible , green blade .
the range of life form within the chlorophyta - from unicellular to various level of coloniality to multicellular form - have be a useful research model for understand the evolution of multicellularity .
the red algae be mainly multicellular but include some unicellular form .
- pron - have rigid cell wall contain agar or carrageenan , which be useful as food solidify agent and as a solidifier add to growth medium for microbe .
chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  three  three figure five  .  three  six ( a )
these large multicellular kelps be member of the brown algae .
note the " leaf " and “
stem " that make - pron - appear similar to green plant .
( b )
this be a species of red algae that be also multicellular .
( c )
the green alga halimeda incrassata , show here grow on the sea floor in shallow water , appear to have plant - like structure , but be not a true plant .
( d ) bioluminesence , visible in the cresting wave in this picture , be a phenomenon of certain dinoflagellate .
( e ) diatoms ( picture in this micrograph ) produce silicaceous test ( skeleton ) that form diatomaceous earth .
( f ) colonial green algae , like volvox in these three micrograph , exhibit simple cooperative association of cell .
( credit a , e  modification of work by noaa  credit b  modification of work by ed bierman  credit c  modification of work by james st . john 
credit d 
modification of work by “ catalano eight  two ” / flickr  credit f  modification of work by dr . ralf wagner ) two  three  four chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  three  seven
chlamydomonas be a unicellular green alga .

which group of algae be associate with harmful algal bloom ?
five  .  five
lichens learning objectives
 explain why lichen be include in the study of microbiology
 describe the unique characteristic of a lichen and the role of each partner in the symbiotic relationship of a lichen 
describe way in which lichen be beneficial to the environment
no one have to worry about get sick from a lichen infection , but lichen be interesting from a microbiological perspective and - pron - be an important component of most terrestrial ecosystem .
lichen provide opportunity for study of close relationship between unrelated microorganism .
lichens contribute to soil production by break down rock , and - pron - be early colonizer in soilless environment such as lava flow .
the cyanobacteria in some lichen can fix nitrogen and act as a nitrogen source in some environment .
lichen be also important soil stabilizer in some desert environment and - pron - be an important winter food source for caribou and reindeer .
finally , lichen produce compound that have antibacterial effect , and further research may discover compound that be medically useful to human .
characteristics a lichen be a combination of two organism , a green alga or cyanobacterium and an ascomycete fungus , live in a symbiotic relationship .
whereas algae normally grow only in aquatic or extremely moist environment , lichen can potentially be find on almost any surface ( especially rock ) or as epiphyte ( mean that - pron - grow on other plant ) .
in some way , the symbiotic relationship between lichen and algae seem like a mutualism ( a relationship in which both organism benefit ) .
the fungus can obtain photosynthate from the algae or cyanobacterium and the algae or chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology two  three  five cyanobacterium can grow in a dry environment than - pron - could otherwise tolerate .
however , most scientist consider this symbiotic relationship to be a control parasitism ( a relationship in which one organism benefit and the other be harm ) because the photosynthetic organism grow less well than - pron - would without the fungus .
- pron - be important to note that such symbiotic interaction fall along a continuum between conflict and cooperation .
lichens be slow growing and can live for century .
- pron - have be use in food and to extract chemical as dye or antimicrobial substance .
some be very sensitive to pollution and have be use as environmental indicator .
lichen have a body call a thallus , an outer , tightly pack fungal layer call a cortex , and an inner , loosely pack fungal layer call a medulla ( figure five  .  three  eight ) .
lichen use hyphal bundle call rhizine to attach to the substrate .
figure five  .  three  eight
this cross - section of a lichen thallus show - pron - various component .
the upper cortex of fungal hypha provide protection .
photosynthesis occur in the algal zone .
the medulla consist of fungal hypha .
the low cortex also provide protection .
the rhizine anchor the thallus to the substrate .
lichen diversity lichens be classify as fungi and the fungal partner belong to the ascomycota and basidiomycota .
lichens can also be group into type base on - pron - morphology .
there be three major type of lichen , although other type exist as well .
lichen that be tightly attach to the substrate , give - pron - a crusty appearance , be call crustose lichen .
those that have leaf - like lobe be foliose lichen  - pron - may only be attach at one point in the growth form , and - pron - also have a second cortex below the medulla .
finally , fruticose lichen have round structure and an overall branched appearance .
figure five  .  three  nine show an example of each of the form of lichen .
two  three  six chapter five

the eukaryotes of microbiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure five  .  three  nine example of the three type of lichen be show here .
( a )
this be a crustose lichen find mostly on marine rock , caloplaca marina .
( b )
this be a foliose lichen , flavoparmelia caperata .
( c )
this be a fruticose lichen , letharia vulpina , which be sufficiently poisonous that - pron - be once use to make arrowhead .
( credit b , c  modification of work by jason hollinger )

what type of organism be find in lichen ?

what be the three growth form of lichen ?
resolution
sarah 's mother ask the doctor what - pron - should do if the cream prescribe for sarah 's ringworm do not work .
the doctor explain that ringworm be a general term for a condition cause by multiple specie .
the first step be to take a scraping for examination under the microscope , which the doctor have already do .
- pron - explain that - pron - have identify the infection as a fungus , and that the antifungal cream work against the most common fungi associate with ringworm .
however , the cream may not work against some specie of fungus .
if the cream be not work after a couple of week , sarah should come in for another visit , at which time the doctor will take step to identify the specie of the fungus .
positive identification of dermatophyte require culture .
for this purpose , sabouraud 's agar may be use .
in the case of sarah 's infection , which clear up within two week of treatment , the culture would have a granular texture and would appear pale pink on top and red underneath .
these feature suggest that the fungus be trichophyton rubrum , a common cause of ringworm .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary five  .  one unicellular eukaryotic parasites

protists be a diverse , polyphyletic group of eukaryotic organism .

protists may be unicellular or multicellular .
- pron - vary in how - pron - get - pron - nutrition , morphology , method of locomotion , and mode of reproduction .
clinical focus chapter five  the eukaryotes of microbiology
two  three  seven 
important structure of protist include contractile vacuole , cilia , flagella , pellicle , and pseudopodium  some lack organelle such as mitochondria .

taxonomy of protist be change rapidly as relationship be reassess use new technique .

the protist include important pathogen and parasite .
five  .  two parasitic helminths 
helminth parasite be include within the study of microbiology because - pron - be often identify by look for microscopic egg and larvae .

the two major group of helminth parasite be the roundworm ( nematoda ) and the flatworm ( platyhelminthes ) .

nematode be common intestinal parasite often transmit through undercooked food , although - pron - be also find in other environment .

platyhelminth include tapeworm and fluke , which be often transmit through undercooked meat .
five  .  three fungi 
the fungus include diverse saprotrophic eukaryotic organism with chitin cell wall 
fungi can be unicellular or multicellular  some ( like yeast ) and fungal spore be microscopic , whereas some be large and conspicuous 
reproductive type be important in distinguish fungal group  medically important specie exist in the four fungal group zygomycota , ascomycota , basidiomycota , and microsporidia
 members of zygomycota , ascomycota , and basidiomycota produce deadly toxin

important difference in fungal cell , such as ergosterol in fungal membrane , can be target for antifungal medication , but similarity between human and fungal cell make - pron - difficult to find target for medication and these medication often have toxic adverse effect five  .  four algae

algae be a diverse group of photosynthetic eukaryotic protist
 algae may be unicellular or multicellular
 large , multicellular algae be call seaweed but be not plant and lack plant - like tissue and organ 
although algae have little pathogenicity , - pron - may be associate with toxic algal bloom that can and aquatic wildlife and contaminate seafood with toxin that cause paralysis 
algae be important for produce agar , which be use as a solidify agent in microbiological medium , and carrageenan , which be use as a solidify agent
five  .  five lichens  lichens be a symbiotic association between a fungus and an algae or a cyanobacterium 
the symbiotic association find in lichen be currently consider to be a control parasitism , in which the fungus benefit and the algae or cyanobacterium be harm 
lichens be slow growing and can live for century in a variety of habitat

lichens be environmentally important , help to create soil , provide food , and act as indicator of air pollution .
chapter six acellular pathogens figure six  .  one
the year two  zero  one  four see the first large - scale outbreak of ebola virus ( electron micrograph , leave ) in human population in west africa ( right ) .
such epidemic be now widely report and document , but viral epidemic be sure to have plague human population since the origin of - pron - specie .
( credit leave  modification of work by thomas w . geisbert )
chapter outline six  .  one virus six  .  two
the viral life cycle six  .  three isolation , culture , and identification of viruses six  .  four viroids , virusoid , and prions introduction public health measure in the develop world have dramatically reduce mortality from viral epidemic .
but when epidemic do occur , - pron - can spread quickly with global air travel .
in two  zero  zero  nine , an outbreak of h one n one influenza spread across various continent .
in early two  zero  one  four , case of ebola in guinea lead to a massive epidemic in western africa .
this include the case of an infected man who travel to the united states , spark fear the epidemic may spread beyond africa .
until the late one  nine  three  zero and the advent of the electron microscope , no one have see a virus .
yet treatment for prevent or cure viral infection be use and develop long before that .
historical record suggest that by the one  seven th century , and perhaps earlier , inoculation ( also know as variolation ) be be use to prevent the viral disease smallpox in various part of the world .
by the late one  eight th century , englishman edward jenner be inoculate patient with cowpox to prevent smallpox , a technique - pron - coin vaccination . [ one ]
today , the structure and genetic of virus be well define , yet new discovery continue to reveal - pron - complexity .
in this chapter , - pron - will learn about the structure , classification , and cultivation of virus , and how - pron - impact - pron - host .
in addition , - pron - will learn about other infective particle such as viroid and prion .
one .
s . riedel “ edward jenner and the history of smallpox and vaccination .
”
baylor university medical center proceedings one  eight , no .
one ( january two  zero  zero  five )  two  one – two  five .
chapter six
 acellular pathogens
two  four  three six  .  one virus learning objectives
 describe the general characteristic of virus as pathogen 
describe viral genome
 describe the general characteristic of viral life cycle 
differentiate among bacteriophage , plant virus , and animal virus 
describe the characteristic use to identify virus as obligate intracellular parasite despite - pron - small size , which prevent - pron - from be see with light microscope , the discovery of a filterable component small than a bacterium that cause tobacco mosaic disease ( tmd ) date back to one  eight  nine  two  . [ two ]
at that time , dmitri ivanovski , a russian botanist , discover the source of tmd by use a porcelain filter device first invent by charles chamberland and louis pasteur in paris in one  eight  eight  four .
porcelain chamberland filter have a pore size of zero  .  one μm , which be small enough to remove all bacteria ≥ zero  .  two μm from any liquid pass through the device .
an extract obtain from tmd - infect tobacco plant be make to determine the cause of the disease .
initially , the source of the disease be think to be bacterial .
- pron - be surprising to everyone when ivanovski , use a chamberland filter , find that the cause of tmd be not remove after pass the extract through the porcelain filter .
so if a bacterium be not the cause of tmd , what could be cause the disease ?
ivanovski conclude the cause of tmd must be an extremely small bacterium or bacterial spore .
other scientist , include martinus beijerinck , continue investigate the cause of tmd .
- pron - be beijerinck , in one  eight  nine  nine , who eventually conclude the causative agent be not a bacterium but , instead , possibly a chemical , like a biological poison - pron - would describe today as a toxin .
as a result , the word virus , latin for poison , be use to describe the cause of tmd a few year after ivanovski 's initial discovery .
even though - pron - be not able to see the virus that cause tmd , and do not realize the cause be not a bacterium , ivanovski be credit as the original discoverer of virus and a founder of the field of virology .
today , - pron - can see virus use electron microscope ( figure six  .  two ) and - pron - know much more about - pron - .
virus be distinct biological entity  however , - pron - evolutionary origin be still a matter of speculation .
in term of taxonomy , - pron - be not include in the tree of life because - pron - be acellular ( not consist of cell ) .
in order to survive and reproduce , virus must infect a cellular host , make - pron - obligate intracellular parasite .
the genome of a virus part one
david , a four  five  - year - old journalist , have just return to the u . s . from travel in russia , china , and africa .
- pron - be not feel well , so - pron - go to - pron - general practitioner complaining of weakness in - pron - arm and leg , fever , headache , noticeable agitation , and minor discomfort .
- pron - think - pron - may be relate to a dog bite - pron - suffer while interview a chinese farmer .
- pron - be experience some prickling and itch sensation at the site of the bite wound , but - pron - tell the doctor that the dog seem healthy and that - pron - have not be concerned until now .
the doctor order a culture and sensitivity test to rule out bacterial infection of the wound , and the result come back negative for any possible pathogenic bacteria .

base on this information , what additional test should be perform on the patient ?

what type of treatment should the doctor recommend ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus two .
h . lecoq .
“
[ discovery of the first virus , the tobacco mosaic virus  one  eight  nine  two or one  eight  nine  eight  ? ] . " comptes rendus de l'academie des sciences –
serie iii – sciences de la
vie three  two  four , no .
one  zero ( two  zero  zero  one )  nine  two  nine – nine  three  three .
two  four  four chapter six

acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five enter a host cell and direct the production of the viral component , protein and nucleic acid , need to form new virus particle call virion .
new virion be make in the host cell by assembly of viral component .
the new virion transport the viral genome to another host cell to carry out another round of infection .
table six  .  one summarize the property of virus .
characteristic of viruses infectious , acellular pathogen obligate intracellular parasite with host and cell - type specificity dna or rna genome ( never both )
genome be surround by a protein capsid and , in some case , a phospholipid membrane stud with viral glycoprotein lack gene for many product need for successful reproduction , require exploitation of host - cell genome to reproduce table six  .  one figure six  .  two ( a ) tobacco mosaic virus ( tmv ) view with transmission electron microscope .
( b )
plant infect with tobacco mosaic disease ( tmd ) , cause by tmv .
( credit a  modification of work by usda agricultural research service - scale - bar datum from matt russell  credit b  modification of work by usda forest service , department of plant pathology archive north carolina state university )

why be the first virus investigate mistaken for a toxin ?
hosts and viral transmission viruses can infect every type of host cell , include those of plant , animal , fungus , protist , bacteria , and archaea .
most virus will only be able to infect the cell of one or a few specie of organism .
this be call the host range .
however , have a wide host range be not common and virus will typically only infect specific host and only specific cell type within those host .
the virus that infect bacteria be call bacteriophage , or simply phage .
the word phage come from the greek word for devour .
other virus be just identify by - pron - host group , such as animal or plant virus .
once a cell be infect , the effect of the virus can vary depend on the type of virus .
chapter six

acellular pathogens two  four  five viruses may cause abnormal growth of the cell or cell death , alter the cell 's genome , or cause little noticeable effect in the cell .
virus can be transmit through direct contact , indirect contact with fomite , or through a vector  an animal that transmit a pathogen from one host to another .
arthropod such as mosquito , tick , and fly , be typical vector for viral disease , and - pron - may act as mechanical vector or biological vector .
mechanical transmission occur when the arthropod carry a viral pathogen on the outside of - pron - body and transmit - pron - to a new host by physical contact .
biological transmission occur when the arthropod carry the viral pathogen inside - pron - body and transmit - pron - to the new host through bite .
in human , a wide variety of virus be capable of cause various infection and disease .
some of the deadly emerge pathogen in human be virus , yet - pron - have few treatment or drug to deal with viral infection , make - pron - difficult to eradicate .
virus that can be transmit from an animal host to a human host can cause zoonosis .
for example , the avian influenza virus originate in bird , but can cause disease in human .
reverse zoonosis be cause by infection of an animal by a virus that originate in a human .
fight bacteria with viruses
the emergence of superbug , or multidrug resistant bacteria , have become a major challenge for pharmaceutical company and a serious health - care problem .
accord to a two  zero  one  three report by the us centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , more than two million people be infect with drug - resistant bacteria in the us annually , result in at least two  three  ,  zero  zero  zero deaths . [ three ]
the continue use and overuse of antibiotic will likely lead to the evolution of even more drug - resistant strain .
one potential solution be the use of phage therapy , a procedure that use bacteria - kill virus ( bacteriophage ) to treat bacterial infection .
phage therapy be not a new idea .
the discovery of bacteriophage date back to the early two  zero th century , and phage therapy be first use in europe in one  nine  one  five by the english bacteriologist frederick twort . [ four ]
however , the subsequent discovery of penicillin and other antibiotic lead to the near abandonment of this form of therapy , except in the former soviet union and a few country in eastern europe .
interest in phage therapy outside of the country of the former soviet union be only recently re - emerge because of the rise in antibiotic - resistant bacteria . [ five ] phage therapy have some advantage over antibiotic in that phage kill only one specific bacterium , whereas antibiotic kill not only the pathogen but also beneficial bacteria of the normal microbiota .
development of new antibiotic be also expensive for drug company and for patient , especially for those who live in country with high poverty rate .
phage have also be use to prevent food spoilage .
in two  zero  zero  six , the us food and drug administration approve the use of a solution contain six bacteriophage that can be spray on lunch meat such as bologna , ham , and turkey to kill listeria monocytogene , a bacterium responsible for listeriosis , a form of food poisoning .
some consumer have concern about the use of phage on food , however , especially give the rise popularity of organic product .
food that have be treat with phage must declare " bacteriophage preparation " in the list of ingredient or include a label declare that the meat have be “ treat with antimicrobial solution to reduce microorganisms . ”[ six ] micro connections three .
us department of health and human services , centers for disease control and prevention .
“
antibiotic resistance threats in the united states , two  zero  one  three .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / drugresistance / pdf / ar - threats -  two  zero  one  three  -  five  zero  eight  . pdf ( access september two  two , two  zero  one  five ) .
four .
m . clokie et al .
“
phage in nature .
"
bacteriophage one , no .
one ( two  zero  one  one )  three  one – four  five .
five . a . sulakvelidze et al .
“
bacteriophage therapy .
”
antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy four  five , no .
three ( two  zero  zero  one )  six  four  nine – six  five  nine .
six .
us food and drug administration .
“ fda approval of listeria - specific bacteriophage preparation on ready - to - eat ( rte ) meat and poultry products .
" http / / www . fda . gov / food / ingredientspackaginglabeling / ucm zero  eight  three  five  seven  two  . htm
( access september two  two , two  zero  one  five ) .
two  four  six chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
why do human not have to be concern about the presence of bacteriophage in - pron - food ?

what be three way that virus can be transmit between host ?
viral structures
in general , virion ( viral particle ) be small and can not be observe use a regular light microscope .
- pron - be much small than prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell  this be an adaptation allow virus to infect these large cell ( see figure six  .  three ) .
the size of a virion can range from two  zero nm for small virus up to nine  zero  zero nm for typical , large virus ( see figure six  .  four ) .
recent discovery , however , have identify new giant viral specie , such as pandoravirus salinus and pithovirus sibericum , with size approach that of a bacterial cell . [ seven ] figure six  .  three ( a )
in this transmission electron micrograph , a bacteriophage ( a virus that infect bacteria ) be dwarf by the bacterial cell - pron - infect .
( b )
an illustration of the bacteriophage in the micrograph .
( credit a  modification of work by u . s . department of energy , office of science , lbl , pbd ) seven .
n . philippe et al .
“
pandoraviruse  amoeba viruses with genomes
up to two  .  five mb reach that of parasitic eukaryotes .
”
science three  four  one , no .
six  one  four  three ( two  zero  one  three )  two  eight  one – two  eight  six .
chapter six

acellular pathogens two  four  seven figure six  .  four
the size of a virus be small relative to the size of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell and - pron - organelle .
in one  nine  three  five , after the development of the electron microscope , wendell stanley be the first scientist to crystallize the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus and discover that - pron - be compose of rna and protein .
in one  nine  four  three , - pron - isolate influenza b virus , which contribute to the development of an influenza ( flu ) vaccine .
stanley 's discovery unlock the mystery of the nature of virus that have be puzzle scientist for over four  zero year and - pron - contribution to the field of virology lead to - pron - be award the nobel prize in one  nine  four  six .
as a result of continue research into the nature of virus , - pron - now know - pron - consist of a nucleic acid ( either rna or dna , but never both ) surround by a protein coat call a capsid ( see figure six  .  five ) .
the interior of the capsid be not fill with cytosol , as in a cell , but instead - pron - contain the bare necessity in term of genome and enzyme need to direct the synthesis of new virion .
each capsid be compose of protein subunit call capsomere make of one or more different type of capsomere protein that interlock to form the closely packed capsid .
there be two category of virus base on general composition .
virus form from only a nucleic acid and capsid be call naked virus or nonenvelope virus .
virus form with a nucleic - acid pack capsid surround by a lipid layer be call envelop virus ( see figure six  .  five ) .
the viral envelope be a small portion of phospholipid membrane obtain as the virion bud from a host cell .
the viral envelope may either be intracellular or cytoplasmic in origin .
extend outward and away from the capsid on some naked virus and envelop virus be protein structure call spike .
at the tip of these spike be structure that allow the virus to attach and enter a cell , like the influenza virus hemagglutinin spike ( h ) or enzyme like the neuraminidase ( n ) influenza virus spike that allow the virus to detach from the cell surface during release of new virion .
influenza virus be often identify by - pron - h and n spike .
for example , h one n one influenza virus be responsible for the pandemic in one  nine  one  eight and two  zero  zero  nine  , [ eight ]
h two n two for the pandemic in one  nine  five  seven , and h three n two for the pandemic in one  nine  six  eight .
eight .
j . cohen .
"
what 's old be new  one  nine  one  eight
virus match two  zero  zero  nine h one n one strain .
science three  two  seven , no . five  nine  seven  three ( two  zero  one  zero ) 
one  five  six  three – one  five  six  four .
two  four  eight chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure six  .  five ( a )
the naked atadenovirus use spike make of glycoprotein from - pron - capsid to bind to host cell .
( b )
the envelop human immunodeficiency virus use spike make of glycoprotein embed in - pron - envelope to bind to host cell ( credit a " micrograph "  modification of work by niaid  credit b
“ micrograph
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
virus vary in the shape of - pron - capsid , which can be either helical , polyhedral , or complex .
a helical capsid form the shape of tobacco mosaic virus ( tmv ) , a naked helical virus , and ebola virus , an envelop helical virus .
the capsid be cylindrical or rod shape , with the genome fitting just inside the length of the capsid .
polyhedral capsid form the shape of poliovirus and rhinovirus , and consist of a nucleic acid surround by a polyhedral ( manysided ) capsid in the form of an icosahedron .
an icosahedral capsid be a three - dimensional , two  zero  - sided structure with one  two vertex .
these capsid somewhat resemble a soccer ball .
both helical and polyhedral virus can have envelope .
viral shape see in certain type of bacteriophage , such as t four phage , and poxvirus , like vaccinia virus , may have feature of both polyhedral and helical virus
so - pron - be describe as a complex viral shape ( see figure six  .  six ) .
in the bacteriophage complex form , the genome be locate within the polyhedral head and the sheath connect the head to the tail fiber and tail pin that help the virus attach to receptor on the host cell 's surface .
poxvirus that have complex shape be often brick shape , with intricate surface characteristic not see in the other category of capsid .
chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  four  nine figure six  .  six viral capsid can be ( a ) helical , ( b ) polyhedral , or ( c ) have a complex shape .
( credit a " micrograph "  modification of work by usda ars  credit b “ micrograph "  modification of work by u . s . department of energy )

which type of virus have spike ?
classification and taxonomy of viruses
although virus be not classify in the three domain of life , - pron - number be great enough to require classification .
since one  nine  seven  one , the international union of microbiological societies virology division have give the task of develop , refining , and maintain a universal virus taxonomy to the international committee on taxonomy of viruses ( ictv ) .
since virus can mutate so quickly , - pron - can be difficult to classify - pron - into a genus and a species epithet use the binomial nomenclature system .
thus , the ictv 's viral nomenclature system classify virus into family and genera base on viral genetic , chemistry , morphology , and mechanism of multiplication .
to date , the ictv have classify know virus in seven order , nine  six family , and three  five  zero genera .
viral family name end in - viridae
( e . g , parvoviridae ) and genus name end in −virus ( e . g . , parvovirus ) .
the name of viral order , family , and genera be all italicized .
when refer to a viral species , - pron - often use a genus and specie epithet such as pandoravirus dulcis or pandoravirus salinus .
the baltimore classification system be an alternative to ictv nomenclature .
the baltimore system classify virus two  five  zero chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five accord to - pron - genome ( dna or rna , single versus double strand , and mode of replication ) .
this system thus create seven group of virus that have common genetic and biology .
explore the late virus taxonomy ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two virustaxon ) at the ictv website .
aside from formal system of nomenclature , virus be often informally group into category base on chemistry , morphology , or other characteristic - pron - share in common .
category may include naked or envelop structure , single - stranded ( ss ) or double - stranded ( ds ) dna or ss or d rna genome , segment or nonsegmente genome , and positive - strand ( + ) or negative - strand ( − ) rna .
for example , herpe virus can be classify as a dsdna envelop virus  human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) be a + ssrna envelop virus , and tobacco mosaic virus be a + ssrna virus .
other characteristic such as host specificity , tissue specificity , capsid shape , and special gene or enzyme may also be use to describe group of similar virus .
table
six  .  two list some of the most common virus that be human pathogen by genome type .
common pathogenic viruses
genome family example virus clinical features
poxviridae orthopoxvirus skin papule , pustule , lesion dsdna , poxviridae parapoxvirus skin lesion envelop herpesviridae simplexvirus cold sore , genital herpe , sexually transmit disease adenoviridae atadenovirus respiratory infection ( common cold ) papillomaviridae papillomavirus genital wart , cervical , vulvar , or vaginal dsdna , cancer naked reoviridae reovirus gastroenteritis severe diarrhea ( stomach flu )
parvoviridae adeno - associate dependoparvovirus
a respiratory tract infection ssdna , naked parvoviridae adeno - associate dependoparvovirus b respiratory tract infection dsrna , naked reoviridae rotavirus
gastroenteritis picornaviridae enterovirus c poliomyelitis picornaviridae
rhinovirus upper respiratory tract infection ( common cold )
+ ssrna , nake picornaviridae hepatovirus hepatitis + ssrna , envelop togaviridae alphavirus encephalitis , hemorrhagic fever table six  .  two link to learning chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  five  one common pathogenic viruses
genome family example virus clinical features
togaviridae rubivirus rubella
retroviridae lentivirus acquire immune deficiency syndrome ( aids )
filoviridae zaire ebolavirus hemorrhagic fever −ssrna , orthomyxoviridae influenzavirus a , b , c flu envelop rhabdoviridae lyssavirus rabies table six  .  two

what be the type of virus genome ?
classification of viral diseases
while the ictv have be task with the biological classification of virus , - pron - have also play an important role in the classification of disease cause by virus .
to facilitate the tracking of virus - relate human disease , the ictv have create classification that link to the international classification of diseases ( icd ) , the standard taxonomy of disease that be maintain and update by the world health organization ( who ) .
the icd assign an alphanumeric code of up to six character to every type of viral infection , as well as all other type of disease , medical condition , and cause of death .
this icd code be use in conjunction with two other code system ( the current procedural terminology , and the healthcare common procedure coding system ) to categorize patient condition for treatment and insurance reimbursement .
for example , when a patient seek treatment for a viral infection , icd code be routinely use by clinician to order laboratory test and prescribe treatment specific to the virus suspect of cause the illness .
this icd code be then use by medical laboratory to identify test that must be perform to confirm the diagnosis .
the icd code be use by the health - care management system to verify that all treatment and laboratory work perform be appropriate for the give virus .
medical coder use icd code to assign the proper code for procedure perform , and medical biller , in turn , use this information to process claim for reimbursement by insurance company .
vitalrecord keeper use icd code to record cause of death on death certificate , and epidemiologist use icd code to calculate morbidity and mortality statistic .

identify two location where - pron - would likely find an icd code .
two  five  two chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five part two david 's doctor be concerned that - pron - symptom include prickle and itch at the site of the dog bite  these sensation could be early symptom of rabie .
several test be available to diagnose rabie in live patient , but no single antemortem test be adequate .
the doctor decide to take sample of david 's blood , saliva , and skin for testing .
the skin sample be take from the nape of the neck ( posterior side of the neck near the hairline ) .
- pron - be about six  - mm long and contain at least one  zero hair follicle , include the superficial cutaneous nerve .
an immunofluorescent staining technique be use on the skin biopsy speciman to detect rabie antibody in the cutaneous nerve at the base of the hair follicle .
a test be also perform on a serum sample from david 's blood to determine whether any antibody for the rabie virus have be produce .
meanwhile , the saliva sample be use for reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain reaction ( rt - pcr ) analysis , a test that can detect the presence of viral nucleic acid ( rna ) .
the blood test come back positive for the presence of rabie virus antigen , prompt david 's doctor to prescribe prophylactic treatment .
david be give a series of intramuscular injection of human rabie immunoglobulin along with a series of rabie vaccine .

why do the immunofluorescent technique look for rabie antibody rather than the rabie virus - pron - ?

if david have contract rabie , what be - pron - prognosis ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
six  .  two
the viral life cycle learning objectives
 describe the lytic and lysogenic life cycle
 describe the replication process of animal virus 
describe unique characteristic of retrovirus and latent virus 
discuss human virus and - pron - virus - host cell interaction 
explain the process of transduction 
describe the replication process of plant virus
all virus depend on cell for reproduction and metabolic process .
by - pron - , virus do not encode for all of the enzyme necessary for viral replication .
but within a host cell , a virus can commandeer cellular machinery to produce more viral particle .
bacteriophage replicate only in the cytoplasm , since prokaryotic cell do not have a nucleus or organelle .
in eukaryotic cell , most dna virus can replicate inside the nucleus , with an exception observe in the large dna virus , such as the poxvirus , that can replicate in the cytoplasm .
rna virus that infect animal cell often replicate in the cytoplasm .
the life cycle of viruses with prokaryote hosts
the life cycle of bacteriophage have be a good model for understand how virus affect the cell - pron - infect , since similar process have be observe for eukaryotic virus , which can cause immediate death of the cell or establish a latent or chronic infection .
virulent phage typically lead to the death of the cell through cell lysis .
temperate phage , on the other hand , can become part of a host chromosome and be replicate with the cell genome until such time as - pron - be induce to make newly assemble virus , or progeny virus .
clinical focus chapter six  acellular pathogens two  five  three
the lytic cycle
during the lytic cycle of virulent phage , the bacteriophage take over the cell , reproduce new phage , and destroy the cell .
t - even phage be a good example of a well - characterize class of virulent phage .
there be five stage in the bacteriophage lytic cycle ( see figure six  .  seven ) .
attachment be the first stage in the infection process in which the phage interact with specific bacterial surface receptor ( e . g . , lipopolysaccharide and ompc protein on host surface ) .
most phage have a narrow host range and may infect one specie of bacteria or one strain within a species .
this unique recognition can be exploit for targeted treatment of bacterial infection by phage therapy or for phage typing to identify unique bacterial subspecie or strain .
the second stage of infection be entry or penetration .
this occur through contraction of the tail sheath , which act like a hypodermic needle to inject the viral genome through the cell wall and membrane .
the phage head and remain component remain outside the bacteria .
figure six  .  seven
a virulent phage show only the lytic cycle picture here .
in the lytic cycle , the phage replicate and lyse the host cell .
the third stage of infection be biosynthesis of new viral component .
after enter the host cell , the virus synthesize virus - encode endonuclease to degrade the bacterial chromosome .
- pron - then hijack the host cell to replicate , transcribe , and translate the necessary viral component ( capsomere , sheath , base plate , tail fiber , and viral enzyme ) for the assembly of new virus .
polymerase gene be usually express early in the cycle , while capsid and tail protein be express later .
during the maturation phase , new virion be create .
to liberate free phage , the bacterial cell wall be disrupt by phage protein such as holin or lysozyme .
the final stage be release .
mature virus burst out of the host cell in a process call lysis and the progeny virus be liberate into the environment to infect new cell .
the lysogenic cycle
in a lysogenic cycle , the phage genome also enter the cell through attachment and penetration .
a prime example of a phage with this type of life cycle be the lambda phage .
during the lysogenic cycle , instead of kill the host , the phage genome integrate into the bacterial chromosome and become part of the host .
the integrated phage genome be call a prophage .
a bacterial host with a prophage be call a lysogen .
the process in which a bacterium be infect by a temperate phage be call lysogeny .
- pron - be typical of temperate phage to be latent or inactive within the cell .
as the bacterium replicate - pron - chromosome , - pron - also replicate the phage 's dna and pass - pron - on to new daughter cell during reproduction .
the presence of the phage may alter the phenotype of the bacterium , since - pron - can bring in extra gene ( e . g . , toxin gene that can increase bacterial virulence ) .
this change in the host phenotype be call lysogenic conversion or phage conversion .
some bacteria , such as vibrio cholerae and clostridium botulinum , be less virulent in the absence of the prophage .
the phage infect these bacteria carry the toxin gene in - pron - genome and enhance the virulence of the host when the toxin gene be express .
in the case of v . cholera , phage encode toxin can cause severe diarrhea  in c . botulinum , the toxin can cause paralysis .
during lysogeny , the prophage will persist in the host chromosome until induction , which result in the excision of the viral genome from the host chromosome .
after two  five  four chapter six  acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five induction have occur the temperate phage can proceed through a lytic cycle and then undergo lysogeny in a newly infect cell ( see figure six  .  eight ) .
figure six  .  eight
a temperate bacteriophage have both lytic and lysogenic cycle .
in the lysogenic cycle , phage dna be incorporate into the host genome , form a prophage , which be pass on to subsequent generation of cell .
environmental stressor such as starvation or exposure to toxic chemical may cause the prophage to be excise and enter the lytic cycle .
this video ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two lysogeniclife ) illustrate the stage of the lysogenic life cycle of a bacteriophage and the transition to a lytic phase .

be a latent phage undetectable in a bacterium ?
transduction transduction occur when a bacteriophage transfer bacterial dna from one bacterium to another during sequential infection .
there be two type of transduction  generalize and specialized transduction .
during the lytic cycle of viral replication , the virus hijack the host cell , degrade the host chromosome , and make more viral genome .
as - pron - assemble and package dna into the phage head , packaging occasionally make a mistake .
instead of package viral dna , - pron - take a random piece of host dna and insert - pron - into the capsid .
once release , this virion will then link to learning chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  five  five inject the former host 's dna into a newly infect host .
the asexual transfer of genetic information can allow for dna recombination to occur , thus provide the new host with new gene ( e . g . , an antibiotic - resistance gene , or a sugar - metabolize gene ) .
generalize transduction occur when a random piece of bacterial chromosomal dna be transfer by the phage during the lytic cycle .
specialized transduction occur at the end of the lysogenic cycle , when the prophage be excise and the bacteriophage enter the lytic cycle .
since the phage be integrate into the host genome , the prophage can replicate as part of the host .
however , some condition ( e . g . , ultraviolet light exposure or chemical exposure ) stimulate the prophage to undergo induction , cause the phage to excise from the genome , enter the lytic cycle , and produce new phage to leave host cell .
during the process of excision from the host chromosome , a phage may occasionally remove some bacterial dna near the site of viral integration .
the phage and host dna from one end or both end of the integration site be package within the capsid and be transfer to the new , infected host .
since the dna transfer by the phage be not randomly package but be instead a specific piece of dna near the site of integration , this mechanism of gene transfer be refer to as specialize transduction ( see figure six  .  nine ) .
the dna can then recombine with host chromosome , give the latter new characteristic .
transduction seem to play an important role in the evolutionary process of bacteria , give - pron - a mechanism for asexual exchange of genetic information .
figure six  .  nine
this flowchart illustrate the mechanism of specialized transduction .
an integrated phage excise , bring with - pron - a piece of the dna adjacent to - pron - insertion point .
on reinfection of a new bacterium , the phage dna integrate along with the genetic material acquire from the previous host .

which phage life cycle be associate with which form of transduction ?
life cycle of viruses with animal hosts lytic animal virus follow similar infection stage to bacteriophage 
attachment , penetration , biosynthesis , maturation , and release ( see figure six  .  one  zero ) .
however , the mechanism of penetration , nucleic - acid biosynthesis , and release differ between bacterial and animal virus .
after bind to host receptor , animal virus enter through endocytosis ( engulfment by the host cell ) or through membrane fusion ( viral envelope with the host cell membrane ) .
many virus be host specific , mean - pron - only infect a certain type of host  and most virus only infect certain type of cell within tissue .
this specificity be call a tissue tropism .
example of this be demonstrate by the poliovirus , which exhibit tropism for the tissue of the brain and spinal cord , or the influenza virus , which have a primary tropism for the respiratory tract .
two  five  six chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure six  .  one  zero
in influenza virus infection , viral glycoprotein attach the virus to a host epithelial cell .
as a result , the virus be engulf .
viral rna and viral protein be make and assemble into new virion that be release by bud .
animal virus do not always express - pron - gene use the normal flow of genetic information - from dna to rna to protein .
some virus have a dsdna genome like cellular organism and can follow the normal flow .
however , other may have ssdna , dsrna , or ssrna genome .
the nature of the genome determine how the genome be replicate and express as viral protein .
if a genome be ssdna , host enzyme will be use to synthesize a second strand that be complementary to the genome strand , thus produce dsdna .
the dsdna can now be replicate , transcribe , and translate similar to host dna .
if the viral genome be rna , a different mechanism must be use .
there be three type of rna genome 
dsrna , positive ( + ) single - strand ( + ssrna ) or negative ( − ) single - strand rna ( −ssrna ) .
if a virus have a + ssrna genome , - pron - can be translate directly to make viral protein .
viral genomic + ssrna act like cellular mrna .
however , if a virus contain a −ssrna genome , the host ribosome can not translate - pron - until the −ssrna be replicate into + ssrna by viral rna - dependent rna polymerase ( rdrp )
( see figure six  .  one  one ) .
the rdrp be bring in by the virus and can be use to make + ssrna from the original −ssrna genome .
the rdrp be also an important enzyme for the replication of dsrna virus , because - pron - use the negative strand of the double - strand genome as a template to create + ssrna .
the newly synthesize + ssrna copy can then be translate by cellular ribosome .
chapter six

acellular pathogens two  five  seven figure six  .  one  one rna virus can contain + ssrna that can be directly read by the ribosome to synthesize viral protein .
virus contain −ssrna must first use the −ssrna as a template for the synthesis of + ssrna before viral protein can be synthesize .
an alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis be observe in the retrovirus , which be + ssrna virus ( see figure six  .  one  two ) .
single - strand rna virus such as hiv carry a special enzyme call reverse transcriptase within the capsid that synthesize a complementary ssdna ( cdna ) copy use the + ssrna genome as a template .
the ssdna be then make into dsdna , which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent part of the host .
the integrate viral genome be call a provirus .
the virus now can remain in the host for a long time to establish a chronic infection .
the provirus stage be similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during the lysogenic cycle .
however , unlike prophage , the provirus do not undergo excision after splice into the genome .
two  five  eight chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure six  .  one  two hiv , an enveloped , icosahedral retrovirus , attach to a cell surface receptor of an immune cell and fuse with the cell membrane .
viral content be release into the cell , where viral enzyme convert the singlestrande rna genome into dna and incorporate - pron - into the host genome .
( credit  modification of work by niaid , nih ) chapter six

acellular pathogens two  five  nine

be rna - dependent rna polymerase make from a viral gene or a host gene ?
persistent infections persistent infection occur when a virus be not completely clear from the system of the host but stay in certain tissue or organ of the infect person .
the virus may remain silent or undergo productive infection without seriously harm or kill the host .
mechanism of persistent infection may involve the regulation of the viral or host gene expression or the alteration of the host immune response .
the two primary category of persistent infection be latent infection and chronic infection .
example of virus that cause latent infection include herpe simplex virus ( oral and genital herpe ) , varicella - zoster virus ( chickenpox and shingle ) , and epstein - barr virus
( mononucleosis ) .
hepatitis c virus and hiv be two example of virus that cause long - term chronic infection .
latent infection
not all animal virus undergo replication by the lytic cycle .
there be virus that be capable of remain hide or dormant inside the cell in a process call latency .
these type of virus be know as latent virus and may cause latent infection .
virus capable of latency may initially cause an acute infection before become dormant .
for example , the varicella - zoster virus infect many cell throughout the body and cause chickenpox , characterize by a rash of blister cover the skin .
about one  zero to one  two day postinfection , the disease resolve and the virus go dormant , live within nerve - cell ganglia for year .
during this time , the virus do not kill the nerve cell or continue replicate .
- pron - be not clear why the virus stop replicate within the nerve cell and express few viral protein but , in some case , typically after many year of dormancy , the virus be reactivate and cause a new disease call shingle ( figure six  .  one  three ) .
whereas chickenpox affect many area throughout the body , shingle be a nerve cell - specific disease emerge from the ganglia in which the virus be dormant .
figure six  .  one  three ( a )
varicella - zoster , the virus that cause chickenpox , have an envelop icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron micrograph .
- pron - double - strand dna genome become incorporate in the host dna .
( b )
after a period of latency , the virus can reactivate in the form of shingle , usually manifest as a painful , localize rash on one side of the body .
( credit a  modification of work by erskine palmer and b . g . partin
- scale - bar datum from matt russell  credit b  modification of work by rosmarie voegtli )
latent virus may remain dormant by exist as circular viral genome molecule outside of the host chromosome .
other become provirus by integrate into the host genome .
during dormancy , virus do not cause any symptom of disease and may be difficult to detect .
a patient may be unaware that - pron - or - pron - be carry the virus unless a viral diagnostic test have be perform .
two  six  zero chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five chronic infection
a chronic infection be a disease with symptom that be recurrent or persistent over a long time .
some viral infection can be chronic if the body be unable to eliminate the virus .
hiv be an example of a virus that produce a chronic infection , often after a long period of latency .
once a person become infect with hiv , the virus can be detect in tissue continuously thereafter , but untreated patient often experience no symptom for year .
however , the virus maintain chronic persistence through several mechanism that interfere with immune function , include prevent expression of viral antigen on the surface of infected cell , alter immune cell - pron - , restrict expression of viral gene , and rapidly change viral antigen through mutation .
eventually , the damage to the immune system result in progression of the disease lead to acquire immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) .
the various mechanism that hiv use to avoid be clear by the immune system be also use by other chronically infect virus , include the hepatitis c virus .

in what two way can a virus manage to maintain a persistent infection ?
life cycle of viruses with plant hosts plant virus be more similar to animal virus than - pron - be to bacteriophage .
plant virus may be envelop or non - enveloped .
like many animal virus , plant virus can have either a dna or rna genome and be single stranded or double strand .
however , most plant virus do not have a dna genome  the majority have a + ssrna genome , which act like messenger rna ( mrna ) .
only a minority of plant virus have other type of genome .
plant virus may have a narrow or broad host range .
for example , the citrus tristeza virus infect only a few plant of the citrus genus , whereas the cucumber mosaic virus infect thousand of plant of various plant family .
most plant virus be transmit by contact between plant , or by fungus , nematode , insect , or other arthropod that act as mechanical vector .
however , some virus can only be transfer by a specific type of insect vector  for example , a particular virus may be transmit by aphid but not whitefly .
in some case , virus may also enter healthy plant through wound , as may occur due to pruning or weather damage .
virus that infect plant be consider biotrophic parasite , which mean that - pron - can establish an infection without kill the host , similar to what be observe in the lysogenic life cycle of bacteriophage .
viral infection can be asymptomatic ( latent ) or can lead to cell death ( lytic infection ) .
the life cycle begin with the penetration of the virus into the host cell .
next , the virus be uncoate within the cytoplasm of the cell when the capsid be remove .
depend on the type of nucleic acid , cellular component be use to replicate the viral genome and synthesize viral protein for assembly of new virion .
to establish a systemic infection , the virus must enter a part of the vascular system of the plant , such as the phloem .
the time require for systemic infection may vary from a few day to a few week depend on the virus , the plant specie , and the environmental condition .
the virus life cycle be complete when - pron - be transmit from an infected plant to a healthy plant .

what be the structure and genome of a typical plant virus ?
viral growth curve
unlike the growth curve for a bacterial population , the growth curve for a virus population over - pron - life cycle do not follow a sigmoidal curve .
during the initial stage , an inoculum of virus cause infection .
in the eclipse phase , virus bind and penetrate the cell with no virion detect in the medium .
the chief difference that next appear in the viral chapter six  acellular pathogens two  six  one growth curve compare to a bacterial growth curve occur when virion be release from the lysed host cell at the same time .
such an occurrence be call a burst , and the number of virion per bacterium release be describe as the burst size .
in a one - step multiplication curve for bacteriophage , the host cell lyse , release many viral particle to the medium , which lead to a very steep rise in viral titer ( the number of virion per unit volume ) .
if no viable host cell remain , the viral particle begin to degrade during the decline of the culture ( see figure six  .  one  four ) .
figure six  .  one  four
the one - step multiplication curve for a bacteriophage population follow three step  one ) inoculation , during which the virion attach to host cell  two ) eclipse , during which entry of the viral genome occur  and three ) burst , when sufficient number of new virion be produce and emerge from the host cell .
the burst size be the maximum number of virion produce per bacterium .

what aspect of the life cycle of a virus lead to the sudden increase in the growth curve ?
unregistered treatments ebola be incurable and deadly .
the outbreak in west africa in two  zero  one  four be unprecedented , dwarf other human ebola epidemic in the level of mortality .
of two  four  ,  six  six  six suspect or confirm case report , one  zero  ,  one  seven  nine people died . [ nine ]
no approve treatment or vaccine for ebola be available .
while some drug have show potential in laboratory study and animal model , - pron - have not be test in human for safety and effectiveness .
not only be these drug untested or unregistered but - pron - be also in short supply .
give the great suffering and high mortality rate , - pron - be fair to ask whether unregistered and untested medication be well than none at all .
should such drug be dispense and , if so , who should receive - pron - , eye on ethics two  six  two chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five in light of - pron - extremely limited supply ?
be - pron - ethical to treat untested drug on patient with ebola ?
on the other hand , be - pron - ethical to withhold potentially life - save drug from die patient ?
or should the drug perhaps be reserve for health - care provider work to contain the disease ?
in august two  zero  one  four , two infect us aid worker and a spanish priest be treat with zmapp , an unregistered drug that have be test in monkey but not in human .
the two american aid worker recover , but the priest die .
later that month , the who release a report on the ethic of treat patient with the drug .
since ebola be often fatal , the panel reason that - pron - be ethical to give the unregistered drug and unethical to withhold - pron - for safety concern .
this situation be an example of " compassionate use " outside the well - establish system of regulation and governance of therapy .
ebola in the us
on september two  four , two  zero  one  four , thomas eric duncan arrive at the texas health presbyterian hospital in dallas complain of a fever , headache , vomiting , and diarrhea - symptom commonly observe in patient with the cold or the flu .
after examination , an emergency department doctor diagnose - pron - with sinusitis , prescribe some antibiotic , and send - pron - home .
two day later , duncan return to the hospital by ambulance .
- pron - condition have deteriorate and additional blood test confirm that - pron - have be infect with the ebola virus .
further investigation reveal that duncan have just return from liberia , one of the country in the midst of a severe ebola epidemic .
on september one  five , nine day before - pron - show up at the hospital in dallas , duncan have help transport an ebola - stricken neighbor to a hospital in liberia .
the hospital continue to treat duncan , but - pron - die several day after be admit .
the timeline of the duncan case be indicative of the life cycle of the ebola virus .
the incubation time for ebola range from two day to two  one day .
nine day pass between duncan 's exposure to the virus infection and the appearance of - pron - symptom .
this correspond , in part , to the eclipse period in the growth of the virus population .
during the eclipse phase , duncan would have be unable to transmit the disease to other .
however , once an infected individual begin exhibit symptom , the disease become very contagious .
ebola virus be transmit through direct contact with droplet of bodily fluid such as saliva , blood , and vomit .
duncan could conceivably have transmit the disease to other at any time after - pron - begin have symptom , presumably some time before - pron - arrival at the hospital in dallas .
once a hospital realize a patient like duncan be infect with ebola virus , the patient be immediately quarantine , and public health official initiate a back trace to identify everyone with whom a patient like duncan may have interact during the period in which - pron - be show symptom .
public health official be able to track down one  zero high - risk individual ( family member of duncan ) and five  zero low - risk individual to monitor - pron - for sign of infection .
none contract the disease .
however , one of the nurse charge with duncan 's care do become infected .
this , along with duncan 's initial misdiagnosis , make - pron - clear that us hospital need to provide additional training to medical personnel to prevent a possible ebola outbreak in the us .

what type of training can prepare health professional to contain emerge epidemic like the ebola outbreak of two  zero  one  four ?

what be the difference between a contagious pathogen and an infectious pathogen ?
case in point nine .
world health organization .
"
who ebola data and statistics .
" march one  eight , two  zero  zero  five .
http / / apps . who . int / gho / datum / view . ebola - sitrep . ebolasummary -
two  zero  one  five  zero  three  one  eight  ? lang =
en chapter six

acellular pathogens two  six  three figure six  .  one  five researcher work with ebola virus use layer of defense against accidental infection , include protective clothing , breathing system , and negative air - pressure cabinet for bench work .
( credit  modification of work by randal j . schoepp )
for additional information about ebola , please visit the cdc ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two ebolacdc ) website .
six  .  three isolation , culture , and identification of viruses learning objectives
 discuss why virus be originally describe as filterable agent 
describe the cultivation of virus and specimen collection and handle 
compare in vivo and in vitro technique use to cultivate virus at the beginning of this chapter , - pron - describe how porcelain chamberland filter with pore small enough to allow virus to pass through be use to discover tmv .
today , porcelain filter have be replace with membrane filter and other device use to isolate and identify virus .
isolation of viruses
unlike bacteria , many of which can be grow on an artificial nutrient medium , virus require a live host cell for replication .
infected host cell ( eukaryotic or prokaryotic ) can be culture and grow , and then the growth medium can be harvest as a source of virus .
virion in the liquid medium can be separate from the host cell by either centrifugation or filtration .
filter can physically remove anything present in the solution that be large than the virion  the virus can then be collect in the filtrate ( see figure six  .  one  six ) .
link to learn two  six  four chapter six

acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure six  .  one  six
membrane filter can be use to remove cell or virus from a solution .
( a )
this scan electron micrograph show rod - shape bacterial cell capture on the surface of a membrane filter .
note difference in the comparative size of the membrane pore and bacteria .
virus will pass through this filter .
( b )
the size of the pore in the filter determine what be capture on the surface of the filter ( animal [ red ] and bacteria [ blue ] ) and remove from liquid pass through .
note the virus ( green ) pass through the finer filter .
( credit a  modification of work by u . s . department of energy )

what size filter pore be need to collect a virus ?
cultivation of viruses viruses can be grow in vivo ( within a whole live organism , plant , or animal ) or in vitro ( outside a live organism in cell in an artificial environment , such as a test tube , cell culture flask , or agar plate ) .
bacteriophage can be grow in the presence of a dense layer of bacteria ( also call a bacterial lawn ) grow in a zero  .  seven % soft agar in a petri dish or flat ( horizontal ) flask ( see figure six  .  one  seven ) .
the agar concentration be decrease from the one  .  five % usually use in culturing bacteria .
the soft zero  .  seven % agar allow the bacteriophage to easily diffuse through the medium .
for lytic bacteriophage , lyse of the bacterial host can then be readily observe when a clear zone call a plaque be detect ( see figure six  .  one  seven ) .
as the phage kill the bacteria , many plaque be observe among the cloudy bacterial lawn .
chapter six

acellular pathogens two  six  five figure six  .  one  seven ( a )
flask like this may be use to culture human or animal cell for viral culturing .
( b )
these plate contain bacteriophage t four grow on an escherichia coli lawn .
clear plaque be visible where host bacterial cell have be lyse .
viral titer increase on the plate to the left .
( credit a  modification of work by national institutes of health  credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
animal virus require cell within a host animal or tissue - culture cell derive from an animal .
animal virus cultivation be important for one ) identification and diagnosis of pathogenic virus in clinical specimen , two ) production of vaccine , and three ) basic research study .
in vivo host source can be a develop embryo in an embryonate bird 's egg ( e . g . , chicken , turkey ) or a whole animal .
for example , most of the influenza vaccine manufacture for annual flu vaccination program be culture in hen ' egg .
the embryo or host animal serve as an incubator for viral replication ( see figure six  .  one  eight ) .
location within the embryo or host animal be important .
many virus have a tissue tropism , and must therefore be introduce into a specific site for growth .
within an embryo , target site include the amniotic cavity , the chorioallantoic membrane , or the yolk sac .
viral infection may damage tissue membrane , produce lesion call pox  disrupt embryonic development  or cause the death of the embryo .
figure six  .  one  eight
( a )
the cell within chicken egg be use to culture different type of virus .
( b )
virus can be replicate in various location within the egg , include the chorioallantoic membrane , the amniotic cavity , and the yolk sac .
( credit a  modification of work by “ chung hoang” / youtube )
for in vitro study , various type of cell can be use to support the growth of virus .
a primary cell culture be freshly prepare from animal organ or tissue .
cell be extract from tissue by mechanical scraping or mincing to release cell or by an enzymatic method use trypsin or collagenase to break up tissue and release single cell into suspension .
because of anchorage - dependence requirement , primary cell culture require a liquid culture medium in a petri dish or tissue - culture flask so cell have a solid surface such as glass or plastic for attachment and growth .
primary culture usually have a limited life span .
when cell in a primary culture undergo mitosis and a sufficient density of cell be produce , cell come in contact with other cell .
when this cell - to - cell - contact occur , mitosis be two  six  six chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five trigger to stop .
this be call contact inhibition and - pron - prevent the density of the cell from become too high .
to prevent contact inhibition , cell from the primary cell culture must be transfer to another vessel with fresh growth medium .
this be call a secondary cell culture .
periodically , cell density must be reduce by pour off some cell and add fresh medium to provide space and nutrient to maintain cell growth .
in contrast to primary cell culture , continuous cell line , usually derive from transformed cell or tumor , be often able to be subculture many time or even grow indefinitely ( in which case - pron - be call immortal ) .
continuous cell line may not exhibit anchorage dependency ( - pron - will grow in suspension ) and may have lose - pron - contact inhibition .
as a result , continuous cell line can grow in pile or lump resemble small tumor growth ( see figure six  .  one  nine ) .
figure six  .  one  nine cell for culture be prepare by separate - pron - from - pron - tissue matrix .
( a ) primary cell culture grow attach to the surface of the culture container .
contact inhibition slow the growth of the cell once - pron - become too dense and begin touch each other .
at this point , growth can only be sustain by make a secondary culture .
( b ) continuous cell culture be not affect by contact inhibition .
- pron - continue to grow regardless of cell density .
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
an example of an immortal cell line be the hela cell line , which be originally cultivate from tumor cell obtain from henrietta lacks , a patient who die of cervical cancer in one  nine  five  one .
hela cell be the first continuous tissueculture cell line and be use to establish tissue culture as an important technology for research in cell biology , virology , and medicine .
prior to the discovery of hela cell , scientist be not able to establish tissue culture with any reliability or stability .
more than six decade later , this cell line be still alive and be use for medical research .
see eye on ethics  the immortal cell line of henrietta lack to read more about this important cell line and the controversial mean by which - pron - be obtain .

what property of cell make periodic dilution of primary cell culture necessary ?
chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  six  seven
the immortal cell line of henrietta lack
in january one  nine  five  one , henrietta lacks , a three  zero  - year - old african american woman from baltimore , be diagnose with cervical cancer at john hopkins hospital .
- pron - now know - pron - cancer be cause by the human papillomavirus ( hpv ) .
cytopathic effect of the virus alter the characteristic of - pron - cell in a process call transformation , which give the cell the ability to divide continuously .
this ability , of course , result in a cancerous tumor that eventually kill mrs . lacks in october at age three  one .
before - pron - death , sample of - pron - cancerous cell be take without - pron - knowledge or permission .
the sample eventually end up in the possession of dr . george gey , a biomedical researcher at johns hopkins university .
gey be able to grow some of the cell from lacks 's sample , create what be know today as the immortal hela cell line .
these cell have the ability to live and grow indefinitely and , even today , be still widely use in many area of research .
accord to lacks 's husband , neither henrietta nor the family give the hospital permission to collect - pron - tissue speciman .
indeed , the family be not aware until two  zero year after lacks 's death that - pron - cell be still alive and actively be use for commercial and research purpose .
yet hela cell have be pivotal in numerous research discovery relate to polio , cancer , and aids , among other disease .
the cell have also be commercialize , although - pron - have never - pron - be patent .
despite this , henrietta lack 's estate have never benefit from the use of the cell , although , in two  zero  one  three , the lacks family be give control over the publication of the genetic sequence of - pron - cell .
this case raise several bioethical issue surround patient ' informed consent and the right to know .
at the time lack 's tissue be take , there be no law or guideline about informed consent .
do that mean - pron - be treat fairly at the time ?
certainly by today 's standard , the answer would be no .
harvest tissue or organ from a die patient without consent be not only consider unethical but illegal , regardless of whether such an act could save other patient ' life .
be - pron - ethical , then , for scientist to continue to use lacks 's tissue for research , even though - pron - be obtain illegally by today 's standard ?
ethical or not , lacks 's cell be widely use today for so many application that - pron - be impossible to list - pron - all .
be this a case in which the end justify the mean ?
would lacks be pleased to know about - pron - contribution to science and the million of people who have benefit ?
would - pron - want - pron - family to be compensate for the commercial product that have be develop use - pron - cell ?
or would - pron - feel violate and exploit by the researcher who take part of - pron - body without - pron - consent ?
because - pron - be never ask , - pron - will never know .
figure six  .  two  zero
a multiphoton fluorescence image of hela cell in culture .
various fluorescent stain have be use to show the dna ( cyan ) , microtubule ( green ) , and golgi apparatus ( orange ) .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes of health ) detection of a virus regardless of the method of cultivation , once a virus have be introduce into a whole host organism , embryo , or eye on ethics two  six  eight chapter six

acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five tissue - culture cell , a sample can be prepare from the infected host , embryo , or cell line for further analysis under a brightfield , electron , or fluorescent microscope .
cytopathic effect ( cpe ) be distinct observable cell abnormality due to viral infection .
cpe can include loss of adherence to the surface of the container , change in cell shape from flat to round , shrinkage of the nucleus , vacuole in the cytoplasm , fusion of cytoplasmic membrane and the formation of multinucleate syncytia , inclusion body in the nucleus or cytoplasm , and complete cell lysis ( see figure six  .  two  one ) .
further pathological change include viral disruption of the host genome and alter normal cell into transformed cell , which be the type of cell associate with carcinoma and sarcoma .
the type or severity of the cpe depend on the type of virus involve .
figure six  .  two  one list cpe for specific virus .
chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  six  nine figure six  .  two  one
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by american society for microbiology ) two  seven  zero chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five watch this video ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two virusesoncell ) to learn about the effect of virus on cell .
hemagglutination assay
a serological assay be use to detect the presence of certain type of virus in patient serum .
serum be the strawcolored liquid fraction of blood plasma from which clotting factor have be remove .
serum can be use in a direct assay call a hemagglutination assay to detect specific type of virus in the patient 's sample .
hemagglutination be the agglutination ( clump ) together of erythrocyte ( red blood cell ) .
many virus produce surface protein or spike call hemagglutinin that can bind to receptor on the membrane of erythrocyte and cause the cell to agglutinate .
hemagglutination be observable without use the microscope , but this method do not always differentiate between infectious and noninfectious viral particle , since both can agglutinate erythrocyte .
to identify a specific pathogenic virus use hemagglutination , - pron - must use an indirect approach .
protein call antibody , generate by the patient 's immune system to fight a specific virus , can be use to bind to component such as hemagglutinin that be uniquely associate with specific type of virus .
the binding of the antibody with the hemagglutinin find on the virus subsequently prevent erythrocyte from directly interact with the virus .
so when erythrocyte be add to the antibody - coat virus , there be no appearance of agglutination  agglutination have be inhibit .
- pron - call these type of indirect assay for virus - specific antibody hemagglutination inhibition ( hai ) assay .
hai can be use to detect the presence of antibody specific to many type of virus that may be cause or have cause an infection in a patient even month or year after infection ( see figure six  .  two  two ) .
this assay be describe in great detail in agglutination assays .
link to learning chapter six

acellular pathogens two  seven  one figure six  .  two  two
this chart show the possible outcome of a hemagglutination test .
row a  erythrocyte do not bind together and will sink to the bottom of the well plate  this become visible as a red dot in the center of the well .
row b  many virus have hemagglutinin that cause agglutination of erythrocyte  the result hemagglutination form a lattice structure that result in red color throughout the well .
row c  virus - specific antibody , the virus , and the erythrocyte be add to the well plate .
the virus - specific antibody inhibit agglutination , as can be see as a red dot in the bottom of the well .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the outcome of a positive hia test ?
nucleic acid amplification test nucleic acid amplification test ( naat ) be use in molecular biology to detect unique nucleic acid sequence of virus in patient sample .
polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) be an naat use to detect the presence of viral dna in a patient 's tissue or body fluid sample .
pcr be a technique that amplifie ( i . e . , synthesize many copy ) of a viral dna segment of interest .
use pcr , short nucleotide sequence call primer bind to specific sequence of viral dna , enable identification of the virus .
reverse transcriptase - pcr ( rt - pcr ) be an naat use to detect the presence of rna virus .
rt - pcr differ from pcr in that the enzyme reverse transcriptase ( rt ) be use to make a cdna from the small amount of viral rna in the speciman .
the cdna can then be amplify by pcr .
both pcr and rt - pcr be use to detect and confirm the presence of the viral nucleic acid in patient specimen .
two  seven  two chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five hpv scare michelle , a two  one  - year - old nursing student , come to the university clinic worry that - pron - may have be expose to a sexually transmit disease ( std ) .
- pron - sexual partner have recently develop several bump on the base of - pron - penis .
- pron - have put off go to the doctor , but michelle suspect - pron - be genital wart cause by hpv .
- pron - be especially concerned because - pron - know that hpv not only cause wart but be a prominent cause of cervical cancer .
- pron - and - pron - partner always use condom for contraception , but - pron - be not confident that this precaution will protect - pron - from hpv .
michelle 's physician find no physical sign of genital wart or any other std , but recommend that michelle get a pap smear along with an hpv test .
the pap smear will screen for abnormal cervical cell and the cpe associate with hpv  the hpv test will test for the presence of the virus .
if both test be negative , michelle can be more assured that - pron - most likely have not become infected with hpv .
however , - pron - doctor suggest - pron - may be wise for michelle to get vaccinate against hpv to protect - pron - from possible future exposure .

why do michelle 's physician order two different test instead of rely on one or the other ?
enzyme immunoassay enzyme immunoassay ( eia ) rely on the ability of antibody to detect and attach to specific biomolecule call antigen .
the detect antibody attache to the target antigen with a high degree of specificity in what may be a complex mixture of biomolecule .
also include in this type of assay be a colorless enzyme attach to the detect antibody .
the enzyme act as a tag on the detect antibody and can interact with a colorless substrate , lead to the production of a colored end product .
eia often rely on layer of antibody to capture and react with antigen , all of which be attach to a membrane filter ( see figure six  .  two  three ) .
eia for viral antigen be often use as preliminary screening test .
if the result be positive , further confirmation will require test with even great sensitivity , such as a western blot or an naat .
eia be discuss in more detail in eia and elisas .
case in point chapter six

acellular pathogens two  seven  three figure six  .  two  three similar to rapid , over - the - counter pregnancy test , eia for viral antigen require a few drop of diluted patient serum or plasma apply to a membrane filter .
the membrane filter have be previously modify and embed with antibody to viral antigen and internal control .
antibody conjugate be add to the filter , with the target antibody attach to the antigen ( in the case of a positive test ) .
excess conjugate be wash off the filter .
substrate be add to activate the enzyme - mediate reaction to reveal the color change of a positive test .
( credit  modification of work by “ cavitri” / wikimedia common ) two  seven  four chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what typically indicate a positive eia test ?
part three
along with the rt / pcr analysis , david 's saliva be also collect for viral cultivation .
in general , no single diagnostic test be sufficient for antemortem diagnosis , since the result will depend on the sensitivity of the assay , the quantity of virion present at the time of testing , and the timing of the assay , since release of virion in the saliva can vary .
as - pron - turn out , the result be negative for viral cultivation from the saliva .
this be not surprising to david 's doctor , because one negative result be not an absolute indication of the absence of infection .
- pron - may be that the number of virion in the saliva be low at the time of sampling .
- pron - be not unusual to repeat the test at interval to enhance the chance of detect high virus load .

should david 's doctor modify - pron - course of treatment base on these test result ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
six  .  four viroids , virusoid , and prions learning objectives  describe viroid and - pron - unique characteristic 
describe virusoid and - pron - unique characteristic

describe prion and - pron - unique characteristic
research attempt to discover the causative agent of previously uninvestigated disease have lead to the discovery of nonlive disease agent quite different from virus .
these include particle consist only of rna or only of protein that , nonetheless , be able to self - propagate at the expense of a host - a key similarity to virus that allow - pron - to cause disease condition .
to date , these discovery include viroid , virusoid , and the proteinaceous prion .
viroids
in one  nine  seven  one , theodor diener , a pathologist work at the agriculture research service , discover an acellular particle that - pron - name a viroid , mean " virus - like .
”
viroid consist only of a short strand of circular rna capable of selfreplication .
the first viroid discover be find to cause potato tuber spindle disease , which cause slow sprouting and various deformity in potato plant ( see figure six  .  two  four ) .
like virus , potato spindle tuber viroid ( pstvs ) take control of the host machinery to replicate - pron - rna genome .
unlike virus , viroid do not have a protein coat to protect - pron - genetic information .
clinical focus chapter six  acellular pathogens two  seven  five
figure six  .  two  four
these potato have be infect by the potato spindle tuber viroid ( pstv ) , which be typically spread when infect knife be use to cut healthy potato , which be then plant .
( credit  pamela roberts , university of florida institute of food and agricultural sciences , usda ars )
viroid can result in devastating loss of commercially important agricultural food crop grow in field and orchard .
since the discovery of pstv , other viroid have be discover that cause disease in plant .
tomato planta macho viroid ( tpmvd ) infect tomato plant , which cause loss of chlorophyll , disfigured and brittle leaf , and very small tomato , result in loss of productivity in this field crop .
avocado sunblotch viroid ( asbvd ) result in low yield and poor - quality fruit .
asbvd be the small viroid discover thus far that infect plant .
peach latent mosaic viroid ( plmvd ) can cause necrosis of flower bud and branch , and wound of ripen fruit , which lead to fungal and bacterial growth in the fruit .
plmvd can also cause similar pathological change in plum , nectarine , apricot , and cherry , result in decreased productivity in these orchard , as well .
viroid , in general , can be disperse mechanically during crop maintenance or harvesting , vegetative reproduction , and possibly via seed and insect , result in a severe drop in food availability and devastating economic consequence .

what be the genome of a viroid make of ?
virusoid a second type of pathogenic rna that can infect commercially important agricultural crop be the virusoid , which be subviral particle best describe as non – self - replicate ssrnas .
rna replication of virusoid be similar to that of viroid but , unlike viroid , virusoid require that the cell also be infect with a specific " helper ” virus .
there be currently only five describe type of virusoid and - pron - associate helper virus .
the helper virus be all from the family of sobemoviruses .
an example of a helper virus be the subterranean clover mottle virus , which have an associate virusoid package inside the viral capsid .
once the helper virus enter the host cell , the virusoid be release and can be find free in plant cell cytoplasm , where - pron - possess ribozyme activity .
the helper virus undergo typical viral replication independent of the activity of the virusoid .
the virusoid genome be small , only two  two  zero to three  eight  eight nucleotide long .
a virusoid genome do not code for any protein , but instead serve only to replicate virusoid rna .
virusoid belong to a large group of infectious agent call satellite rnas , which be similar pathogenic rna find in animal .
unlike the plant virusoid , satellite rna may encode for protein  however , like plant virusoid , satellite rna must coinfect with a helper virus to replicate .
one satellite rna that infect human and that have be describe by some scientist as a virusoid be the hepatitis delta virus ( hdv ) , which , by some report , be also call hepatitis delta virusoid .
much large than a plant virusoid , hdv have a circular , ssrna genome of one  ,  seven  zero  zero nucleotide and can direct the biosynthesis of hdv - associate protein .
the hdv helper virus be the hepatitis b virus ( hbv ) .
coinfection with hbv and hdv result in more severe pathological change in the liver during infection , which be two  seven  six chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five how hdv be first discover .

what be the main difference between a viroid and a virusoid ?
prion
at one time , scientist believe that any infectious particle must contain dna or rna .
then , in one  nine  eight  two , stanley prusiner , a medical doctor study scrapie ( a fatal , degenerative disease in sheep ) discover that the disease be cause by proteinaceous infectious particle , or prion .
because protein be acellular and do not contain dna or rna , prusiner 's finding be originally meet with resistance and skepticism  however , - pron - research be eventually validate , and - pron - receive the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in one  nine  nine  seven .
a prion be a misfolde rogue form of a normal protein ( prpc ) find in the cell .
this rogue prion protein ( prpsc ) , which may be cause by a genetic mutation or occur spontaneously , can be infectious , stimulate other endogenous normal protein to become misfolded , form plaque ( see figure six  .  two  five ) .
today , prion be know to cause various form of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy ( tse ) in human and animal .
tse be a rare degenerative disorder that affect the brain and nervous system .
the accumulation of rogue protein cause the brain tissue to become spongelike , kill brain cell and form hole in the tissue , lead to brain damage , loss of motor coordination , and dementia ( see figure six  .  two  six ) .
infect individual be mentally impair and become unable to move or speak .
there be no cure , and the disease progress rapidly , eventually lead to death within a few month or year .
figure six  .  two  five
endogenous normal prion protein ( prpc ) be convert into the disease - cause form ( prpsc ) when - pron - encounter this variant form of the protein .
prpsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue , especially if a mutant form of the protein be present , or - pron - may originate from misfolded prion consume in food that eventually find - pron - way into brain tissue .
( credit b  modification of work by usda ) chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  seven  seven figure six  .  two  six creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( cjd ) be a fatal disease that cause degeneration of neural tissue .
( a )
these brain scan compare a normal brain to one with cjd .
( b )
compare to a normal brain , the brain tissue of a cjd patient be full of sponge - like lesion , which result from abnormal formation of prion protein .
( credit a ( right ) 
modification of work by dr . laughlin dawes  credit b ( top )  modification of work by suzanne wakim  credit b ( bottom )  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) tse in human include kuru , fatal familial insomnia , gerstmann - straussler - scheinker disease , and creutzfeldt -
jakob disease ( see figure six  .  two  six ) .
tse in animal include mad cow disease , scrapie ( in sheep and goat ) , and chronic wasting disease ( in elk and deer ) .
tse can be transmit between animal and from animal to human by eat contaminate meat or animal feed .
transmission between human can occur through heredity ( as be often the case with gss and cjd ) or by contact with contaminated tissue , as may occur during a blood transfusion or organ transplant .
there be no evidence for transmission via casual contact with an infect person .
table six  .  three list tse that affect human and - pron - mode of transmission .
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( tses ) in humans disease mechanism ( s ) of transmission[ one  zero ] sporadic cjd
( scjd ) not know  possibly by alteration of normal prior protein ( prp ) to rogue form due to somatic mutation variant cjd ( vcjd )
eat contaminate cattle product and by secondary bloodborne transmission familial cjd
( fcjd ) mutation in germline prp gene iatrogenic cjd ( icjd ) contaminated neurosurgical instrument , corneal graft , gonadotrophic hormone , and , secondarily , by blood transfusion kuru
eating infect meat through ritualistic cannibalism gerstmann - straussler - scheinker disease ( gss ) mutation in germline prp gene table six  .  three one  zero .
national institute of neurological disorders and stroke .
“
creutzfeldt - jakob disease fact sheet .
"
http / / www . ninds . nih . gov / disorders / cjd / detail_cjd . htm
( access december three  one , two  zero  one  five ) .
two  seven  eight chapter six 
acellular pathogen
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( tses ) in humans disease mechanism ( s ) of transmission fatal familial insomnia ( ffi ) mutation in germline prp gene table six  .  three prion be extremely difficult to destroy because - pron - be resistant to heat , chemical , and radiation .
even standard sterilization procedure do not ensure the destruction of these particle .
currently , there be no treatment or cure for tse disease , and contaminate meat or infect animal must be handle accord to federal guideline to prevent transmission .

do a prion have a genome ?
for more information on the handling of animal and prion - contaminate material , visit the guideline publish on the cdc ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two cdccontaminat ) and who ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two whocontaminat ) website .
resolution
a few day later , david 's doctor receive the result of the immunofluorescence test on - pron - skin sample .
the test be negative for rabie antigen .
a second viral antigen test on - pron - saliva sample also come back negative .
despite these result , the doctor decide to continue david 's current course of treatment .
give the positive rt - pcr test , - pron - be good not to rule out a possible rabie infection .
near the site of the bite , david receive an injection of rabie immunoglobulin , which attach to and inactivate any rabie virus that may be present in - pron - tissue .
over the next one  four day , - pron - receive a series of four rabie - specific vaccination in the arm .
these vaccine activate david 's immune response and help - pron - body recognize and fight the virus .
thankfully , with treatment , david symptom improve and - pron - make a full recovery .
not all rabie case have such a fortunate outcome .
in fact , rabie be usually fatal once the patient start to exhibit symptom , and postbite treatment be mainly palliative ( i . e . , sedation and pain management ) .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
link to learn clinical focus chapter six
 acellular pathogens two  seven  nine summary six  .  one viruses

virus be generally ultramicroscopic , typically from two  zero nm to nine  zero  zero nm in length .
some large virus have be find .

virion be acellular and consist of a nucleic acid , dna or rna , but not both , surround by a protein capsid .
there may also be a phospholipid membrane surround the capsid .

virus be obligate intracellular parasite .

virus be know to infect various type of cell find in plant , animal , fungus , protist , bacteria , and archaea .
virus typically have limit host range and infect specific cell type .

viruses may have helical , polyhedral , or complex shape .

classification of virus be base on morphology , type of nucleic acid , host range , cell specificity , and enzyme carry within the virion .

like other disease , viral disease be classify use icd code .
six  .  two
the viral life cycle 
many virus target specific host or tissue .
some may have more than one host .

many virus follow several stage to infect host cell .
these stage include attachment , penetration , uncoating , biosynthesis , maturation , and release .

bacteriophage have a lytic or lysogenic cycle .
the lytic cycle lead to the death of the host , whereas the lysogenic cycle lead to integration of phage into the host genome .

bacteriophages inject dna into the host cell , whereas animal virus enter by endocytosis or membrane fusion .

animal virus can undergo latency , similar to lysogeny for a bacteriophage .

the majority of plant virus be positive - strand ssrna and can undergo latency , chronic , or lytic infection , as observe for animal virus .

the growth curve of bacteriophage population be a one - step multiplication curve and not a sigmoidal curve , as compare to the bacterial growth curve .

bacteriophage transfer genetic information between host use either generalize or specialized transduction .
six  .  three isolation , culture , and identification of viruses  viral cultivation require the presence of some form of host cell ( whole organism , embryo , or cell culture ) .

virus can be isolate from sample by filtration .

viral filtrate be a rich source of release virion .

bacteriophage be detect by presence of clear plaque on bacterial lawn .
 animal and plant virus be detect by cytopathic effect , molecular technique ( pcr , rt - pcr ) , enzyme immunoassay , and serological assay ( hemagglutination assay , hemagglutination inhibition assay ) .
six  .  four viroids , virusoid , and prion 
other acellular agent such as viroid , virusoid , and prion also cause disease .
viroid consist of small , naked ssrnas that cause disease in plant .
virusoid be ssrnas that require other helper virus to establish an infection .
prion be proteinaceous infectious particle that cause transmissible spongiform encephalopathy .

prion be extremely resistant to chemical , heat , and radiation .

there be no treatment for prion infection .
chapter seven microbial biochemistry figure
seven  .  one scientist stanley miller ( picture ) and harold urey demonstrate that organic compound may have originate naturally from inorganic matter .
the miller - urey experiment illustrate here simulate the effect of lightning on chemical compound find in the earth 's early atmosphere .
the result reaction yield amino acid , the chemical building block of protein .
( credit “ photo
" 
modification of work by nasa  credit “ illustration
" 
modification of work by courtney harrington ) chapter outline seven  .  one organic molecule seven  .  two carbohydrates seven  .  three lipid seven  .  four protein seven  .  five
use biochemistry to identify microorganisms introduction
the earth be estimate to be four  .  six billion year old , but for the first two billion year , the atmosphere lack oxygen , without which the earth could not support life as - pron - know - pron - .
one hypothesis about how life emerge on earth involve the concept of a " primordial soup .
"
this idea propose that life begin in a body of water when metal and gas from the atmosphere combine with a source of energy , such as lightning or ultraviolet light , to form the carbon compound that be the chemical building block of life .
in one  nine  five  two , stanley miller ( one  nine  three  zero – two  zero  zero  seven ) , a graduate student at the university of chicago , and - pron - professor harold urey
( one  eight  nine  three – one  nine  eight  one ) , set out to confirm this hypothesis in a nowfamous experiment .
miller and urey combine what - pron - believe to be the major component of the earth
's early atmosphere - water ( h two o ) , methane ( ch four ) , hydrogen ( h two ) , and ammonia (
nh three  ) -and seal - pron - in a sterile flask .
next , - pron - heat the flask to produce water vapor and pass electric spark through the mixture to mimic lightning in the atmosphere ( figure seven  .  one ) .
when - pron - analyze the content of the flask a week later , - pron - find amino acid , the structural unit of protein
- molecule essential to the function of all organism .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry two  eight  five seven  .  one organic molecules learning objectives  identify common element and structure find in organic molecule

explain the concept of isomerism 
identify example of functional group  describe the role of functional group in synthesize polymer
biochemistry be the discipline that study the chemistry of life , and - pron - objective be to explain form and function base on chemical principle .
organic chemistry be the discipline devote to the study of carbon - base chemistry , which be the foundation for the study of biomolecule and the discipline of biochemistry .
both biochemistry and organic chemistry be base on the concept of general chemistry , some of which be present in appendix a . elements in live cells
the most abundant element in cell be hydrogen ( h ) , follow by carbon ( c ) , oxygen ( o ) , nitrogen ( n ) , phosphorous ( p ) , and sulfur ( s ) .
- pron - call these element macronutrient , and - pron - account for about nine  nine % of the dry weight of cell .
some element , such as sodium ( na ) , potassium ( k ) , magnesium ( mg ) , zinc ( zn ) , iron ( fe ) , calcium ( ca ) , molybdenum ( mo ) , copper ( cu ) , cobalt ( co ) , manganese ( mn ) , or vanadium ( va ) , be require by some cell in very small amount and be call micronutrient or trace element .
all of these element be essential to the function of many biochemical reaction , and , therefore , be essential to life .
the four most abundant element in live matter ( c , n , o , and h ) have low atomic number and be thus light element capable of form strong bond with other atom to produce molecule ( figure seven  .  two ) .
carbon form four chemical bond , whereas nitrogen form three , oxygen form two , and hydrogen form one .
when bond together within molecule , oxygen , sulfur , and nitrogen often have one or more “ lone pair " of electron that play important role in determine many of the molecule ' physical and chemical property ( see appendix a ) .
these trait in combination permit the formation of a vast number of diverse molecular specie necessary to form the structure and enable the function of live organism .
part one penny be a one  six  - year - old student who visit - pron - doctor , complain about an itchy skin rash .
- pron - have a history of allergic episode .
the doctor look at - pron - sun - tan skin and ask - pron - if - pron - switch to a different sunscreen .
- pron - say - pron - have , so the doctor diagnose an allergic eczema .
the symptom be mild so the doctor tell penny to avoid use the sunscreen that cause the reaction and prescribe an over - the - counter moisturizing cream to keep - pron - skin hydrate and to help with itching .

what kind of substance would - pron - expect to find in a moisturizing cream ?

what physical or chemical property of these substance would help alleviate itching and inflammation of the skin ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus two  eight  six chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  two
some common molecule include carbon dioxide , ammonia , and oxygen , which consist of combination of oxygen atom ( red sphere ) , carbon atom ( gray sphere ) , hydrogen atom ( white sphere ) , or nitrogen atom ( blue sphere ) .
live organism contain inorganic compound ( mainly water and salt  see appendix a ) and organic molecule .
organic molecule contain carbon  inorganic compound do not .
carbon oxide and carbonate be exception  - pron - contain carbon but be consider inorganic because - pron - do not contain hydrogen .
the atom of an organic molecule be typically organize around chain of carbon atom .
inorganic compound make up one %– one  .  five % of a live cell 's mass .
- pron - be small , simple compound that play important role in the cell , although - pron - do not form cell structure .
most of the carbon find in organic molecule originate from inorganic carbon source such as carbon dioxide capture via carbon fixation by microorganism .

describe the most abundant element in nature .

describe the most abundant element in naturewhat be the difference between organic and inorganic molecule ?
organic molecules and isomerism organic molecule in organism be generally large and more complex than inorganic molecule .
- pron - carbon skeleton be hold together by covalent bond .
- pron - form the cell of an organism and perform the chemical reaction that facilitate life .
all of these molecule , call biomolecule because - pron - be part of live matter , contain carbon , which be the building block of life .
carbon be a very unique element in that - pron - have four valence electron in - pron - outer orbital and can form four single covalent bond with up to four other atom at the same time ( see appendix a ) .
these atom be usually oxygen , hydrogen , nitrogen , sulfur , phosphorous , and carbon - pron -  the simple organic compound be methane , in which carbon bind only to hydrogen ( figure seven  .  three ) .
as a result of carbon 's unique combination of size and bonding property , carbon atom can bind together in large number , thus produce a chain or carbon skeleton .
the carbon skeleton of organic molecule can be straight , branch , or ring shape ( cyclic ) .
organic molecule be build on chain of carbon atom of vary length  most be typically very long , which allow for a huge number and variety of compound .
no other element have the ability to form so many different molecule of so many different size and shape .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry two  eight  seven figure seven  .  three
a carbon atom can bond with up to four other atom .
the simple organic molecule be methane ( ch four ) , depict here .
molecule with the same atomic makeup but different structural arrangement of atom be call isomer .
the concept of isomerism be very important in chemistry because the structure of a molecule be always directly relate to - pron - function .
slight change in the structural arrangement of atom in a molecule may lead to very different property .
chemist represent molecule by - pron - structural formula , which be a graphic representation of the molecular structure , show how the atom be arrange .
compound that have identical molecular formula but differ in the bonding sequence of the atom be call structural isomer .
the monosaccharide glucose , galactose , and fructose all have the same molecular formula , c six h one  two o six , but - pron - can see from figure seven  .  four that the atom be bond together differently .
figure seven  .  four glucose , galactose , and fructose have the same chemical formula ( c six h one  two o six ) , but these structural isomer differ in - pron - physical and chemical property .
isomer that differ in the spatial arrangement of atom be call stereoisomer  one unique type be enantiomer .
the property of enantiomer be originally discover by louis pasteur in one  eight  four  eight while use a microscope to analyze crystallize fermentation product of wine .
enantiomer be molecule that have the characteristic of chirality , in which - pron - structure be nonsuperimposable mirror image of each other .
chirality be an important characteristic in many biologically important molecule , as illustrate by the example of structural difference in the enantiomeric form of the monosaccharide glucose or the amino acid alanine ( figure seven  .  five ) .
many organism be only able to use one enantiomeric form of certain type of molecule as nutrient and as building block to make structure within a cell .
some enantiomeric form of amino acid have distinctly different taste and smell when consume as food .
for example , l - aspartame , commonly call aspartame , taste sweet , whereas daspartame be tasteless .
drug enantiomer can have very different pharmacologic affect .
for example , the compound two  eight  eight chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five methorphan exist as two enantiomer , one of which act as an antitussive ( dextromethorphan , a cough suppressant ) , whereas the other act as an analgesic ( levomethorphan , a drug similar in effect to codeine ) .
figure seven  .  five enantiomer be stereoisomer that exhibit chirality .
- pron - chemical structure be nonsuperimposable mirror image of each other .
( a ) d - glucose and l - glucose be monosaccharide that be enantiomer .
( b )
the enantiomer d - alanine and l - alanine be enantiomer find in bacterial cell wall and human cell , respectively .
enantiomer be also call optical isomer because - pron - can rotate the plane of polarize light .
some of the crystal pasteur observe from wine fermentation rotate light clockwise whereas other rotate the light counterclockwise .
today , - pron - denote enantiomer that rotate polarize light clockwise ( + ) as d form , and the mirror image of the same molecule that rotate polarize light counterclockwise ( − ) as the l form .
the d and l label be derive from the latin word dexter ( on the right ) and laevus ( on the left ) , respectively .
these two different optical isomer often have very different biological property and activity .
certain specie of mold , yeast , and bacteria , such as rhizopus , yarrowia , and lactobacillus spp . , respectively , can only metabolize one type of optical isomer  the opposite isomer be not suitable as a source of nutrient .
another important reason to be aware of optical isomer be the therapeutic use of these type of chemical for drug treatment , because some microorganism can only be affect by one specific optical isomer .

- pron - say that life be carbon base .
what make carbon so suitable to be part of all the macromolecule of live organism ?
biologically significant functional groups
in addition to contain carbon atom , biomolecule also contain functional group - group of atom within molecule that be categorize by - pron - specific chemical composition and the chemical reaction - pron - perform , regardless of the molecule in which the group be find .
some of the most common functional group be list in figure seven  .  six .
in the formula , the symbol r stand for “ residue " and represent the remainder of the molecule .
r may symbolize just a single hydrogen atom or - pron - may represent a group of many atom .
notice that some functional group be relatively simple , consist of just one or two atom , while some comprise two of these simple functional group .
for example , a carbonyl group be a functional group compose of a carbon atom double bond to an oxygen atom 
c =
o . - pron - be present in several class of organic compound as part of large functional group such as ketone , aldehyde , carboxylic acid , and amide .
in ketone , the carbonyl be present as an internal group , whereas in aldehyde - pron - be a terminal group .
chapter seven
 microbial biochemistry two  eight  nine figure seven  .  six macromolecules carbon chain form the skeleton of most organic molecule .
functional group combine with the chain to form two  nine  zero chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five biomolecule .
because these biomolecule be typically large , - pron - call - pron - macromolecule .
many biologically relevant macromolecule be form by link together a great number of identical , or very similar , small organic molecule .
the small molecule act as building block and be call monomer , and the macromolecule that result from - pron - linkage be call polymer .
cell and cell structure include four main group of carbon - contain macromolecule  polysaccharide , protein , lipid , and nucleic acid .
the first three group of molecule will be study throughout this chapter .
the biochemistry of nucleic acid will be discuss in biochemistry of the genome .
of the many possible way that monomer may be combine to yield polymer , one common approach encounter in the formation of biological macromolecule be dehydration synthesis .
in this chemical reaction , monomer molecule bind end to end in a process that result in the formation of water molecule as a byproduct  h - monom
- oh + h - monom -
oh ⟶ h
- monom
- monom
- oh + h two o figure seven  .  seven show dehydration synthesis of glucose bind together to form maltose and a water molecule .
table seven  .  one summarize macromolecule and some of - pron - function .
figure seven  .  seven
in this dehydration synthesis reaction , two molecule of glucose be link together to form maltose .
in the process , a water molecule be form .
some functions of macromolecules macromolecule functions carbohydrates energy storage , receptor , food , structural role in plant , fungal cell wall , exoskeleton of insect lipids energy storage , membrane structure , insulation , hormone , pigment nucleic acid storage and transfer of genetic information proteins enzymes , structure , receptor , transport , structural role in the cytoskeleton of a cell and the extracellular matrix table seven  .  one

what be the byproduct of a dehydration synthesis reaction ?
chapter seven
 microbial biochemistry two  nine  one seven  .  two carbohydrates learning objectives

give example of monosaccharide and polysaccharide 
describe the function of monosaccharide and polysaccharide within a cell
the most abundant biomolecule on earth be carbohydrate .
from a chemical viewpoint , carbohydrate be primarily a combination of carbon and water , and many of - pron - have the empirical formula ( ch two o ) n , where n be the number of repeat unit .
this view represent these molecule simply as " hydrated ” carbon atom chain in which water molecule attach to each carbon atom , lead to the term
" carbohydrate .
"
although all carbohydrate contain carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen , there be some that also contain nitrogen , phosphorus , and / or sulfur .
carbohydrate have myriad different function .
- pron - be abundant in terrestrial ecosystem , many form of which - pron - use as food source .
these molecule be also vital part of macromolecular structure that store and transmit genetic information ( i . e . , dna and rna ) .
- pron - be the basis of biological polymer that impart strength to various structural component of organism ( e . g . , cellulose and chitin ) , and - pron - be the primary source of energy storage in the form of starch and glycogen .
monosaccharide 
the sweet ones
in biochemistry , carbohydrate be often call saccharide , from the greek sakcharon , mean sugar , although not all the saccharide be sweet .
the simple carbohydrate be call monosaccharide , or simple sugar .
- pron - be the building block ( monomer ) for the synthesis of polymer or complex carbohydrate , as will be discuss further in this section .
monosaccharide be classify base on the number of carbon in the molecule .
general category be identify use a prefix that indicate the number of carbon and the suffix –ose , which indicate a saccharide  for example , triose ( three carbon ) , tetrose ( four carbon ) , pentose ( five carbon ) , and hexose ( six carbon ) ( figure seven  .  eight ) .
the hexose d - glucose be the most abundant monosaccharide in nature .
other very common and abundant hexose monosaccharide be galactose , use to make the disaccharide milk sugar lactose , and the fruit sugar fructose .
two  nine  two chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  eight
monosaccharide be classify base on the position of the carbonyl group and the number of carbon in the backbone .
monosaccharide of four or more carbon atom be typically more stable when - pron - adopt cyclic , or ring , structure .
these ring structure result from a chemical reaction between functional group on opposite end of the sugar 's flexible carbon chain , namely the carbonyl group and a relatively distant hydroxyl group .
glucose , for example , form a six - membered ring ( figure seven  .  nine ) .
figure seven  .  nine ( a )
a linear monosaccharide ( glucose in this case ) form a cyclic structure .
( b )
this illustration show a more realistic depiction of the cyclic monosaccharide structure .
note in these cyclic structural diagram , the carbon atom compose the ring be not explicitly show .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry two  nine  three

why do monosaccharide form ring structure ?
disaccharide two monosaccharide molecule may chemically bond to form a disaccharide .
the name give to the covalent bond between the two monosaccharide be a glycosidic bond .
glycosidic bond form between hydroxyl group of the two saccharide molecule , an example of the dehydration synthesis describe in the previous section of this chapter 
monosaccharide - oh + ho - monosaccharide ⟶ monosaccharide
- o - monosaccharide ⎤ ⎦
⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ disaccharide common disaccharide be the grain sugar maltose , make of two glucose molecule  the milk sugar lactose , make of a galactose and a glucose molecule  and the table sugar sucrose , make of a glucose and a fructose molecule ( figure seven  .  one  zero ) .
figure seven  .  one  zero
common disaccharide include maltose , lactose , and sucrose .
polysaccharide polysaccharides , also call glycan , be large polymer compose of hundred of monosaccharide monomer .
unlike mono - and disaccharide , polysaccharide be not sweet and , in general , - pron - be not soluble in water .
like disaccharide , the monomeric unit of polysaccharide be link together by glycosidic bond .
polysaccharide be very diverse in - pron - structure .
three of the most biologically important polysaccharide - starch , glycogen , and cellulose - be all compose of repetitive glucose unit , although - pron - differ in - pron - structure ( figure seven  .  one  one ) .
cellulose consist of a linear chain of glucose molecule and be a common structural component of cell wall in plant and other organism .
glycogen and starch be branch polymer  glycogen be the primary energy - storage two  nine  four chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five molecule in animal and bacteria , whereas plant primarily store energy in starch .
the orientation of the glycosidic linkage in these three polymer be different as well and , as a consequence , linear and branch macromolecule have different property .
modify glucose molecule can be fundamental component of other structural polysaccharide .
example of these type of structural polysaccharide be n - acetyl glucosamine ( nag ) and n - acetyl muramic acid ( nam ) find in bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan .
polymer of nag form chitin , which be find in fungal cell wall and in the exoskeleton of insect .
figure seven  .  one  one starch , glycogen , and cellulose be three of the most important polysaccharide .
in the top row , hexagon represent individual glucose molecule .
micrograph ( bottom row ) show wheat starch granule stain with iodine ( leave ) , glycogen granule ( g ) inside the cell of a cyanobacterium ( middle ) , and bacterial cellulose fiber ( right ) .
( credit “ iodine granule
" 
modification of work by kiselov yuri
 credit “ glycogen granule " 
modification of work by stöckel j , elvitigala tr , liberton m , pakrasi hb
 credit “ cellulose "  modification of work by american society for microbiology )

what be the most biologically important polysaccharide and why be - pron - important ?
chapter seven
 microbial biochemistry two  nine  five seven  .  three lipid learn objectives describe the chemical composition of lipid
 describe the unique characteristic and diverse structure of lipid
 compare and contrast triacylglyceride ( triglyceride ) and phospholipid .

describe how phospholipid be use to construct biological membrane .
although - pron - be compose primarily of carbon and hydrogen , lipid molecule may also contain oxygen , nitrogen , sulfur , and phosphorous .
lipid serve numerous and diverse purpose in the structure and function of organism .
- pron - can be a source of nutrient , a storage form for carbon , energy - storage molecule , or structural component of membrane and hormone .
lipid comprise a broad class of many chemically distinct compound , the most common of which be discuss in this section .
fatty acids and triacylglycerides
the fatty acid be lipid that contain long - chain hydrocarbon terminate with a carboxylic acid functional group .
because the long hydrocarbon chain , fatty acid be hydrophobic (
“ water fear " ) or nonpolar .
fatty acid with hydrocarbon chain that contain only single bond be call saturate fatty acid because - pron - have the great number of hydrogen atom possible and be , therefore , “ saturate " with hydrogen .
fatty acid with hydrocarbon chain contain at least one double bond be call unsaturated fatty acid because - pron - have few hydrogen atom .
saturate fatty acid have a straight , flexible carbon backbone , whereas unsaturated fatty acid have " kink " in - pron - carbon skeleton because each double bond cause a rigid bend of the carbon skeleton .
these difference in saturate versus unsaturated fatty acid structure result in different property for the corresponding lipid in which the fatty acid be incorporate .
for example , lipid contain saturate fatty acid be solid at room temperature , whereas lipid contain unsaturated fatty acid be liquid .
a triacylglycerol , or triglyceride , be form when three fatty acid be chemically link to a glycerol molecule ( figure seven  .  one  two ) .
triglyceride be the primary component of adipose tissue ( body fat ) , and be major constituent of sebum ( skin oil ) .
- pron - play an important metabolic role , serve as efficient energy - storage molecule that can provide more than double the caloric content of both carbohydrate and protein .
figure seven  .  one  two triglyceride be compose of a glycerol molecule attach to three fatty acid by a dehydration synthesis reaction .
two  nine  six chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  explain why fatty acid with hydrocarbon chain that contain only single bond be call saturate fatty acid .
phospholipids and biological membranes triglycerides be classify as simple lipid because - pron - be form from just two type of compound  glycerol and fatty acid .
in contrast , complex lipid contain at least one additional component , for example , a phosphate group ( phospholipid ) or a carbohydrate moiety ( glycolipid ) .
figure seven  .  one  three depict a typical phospholipid compose of two fatty acid link to glycerol ( a diglyceride ) .
the two fatty acid carbon chain may be both saturate , both unsaturated , or one of each .
instead of another fatty acid molecule ( as for triglyceride ) , the third bind position on the glycerol molecule be occupy by a modified phosphate group .
figure seven  .  one  three
this illustration show a phospholipid with two different fatty acid , one saturated and one unsaturated , bond to the glycerol molecule .
the unsaturated fatty acid have
a slight kink in - pron - structure due to the double bond .
the molecular structure of lipid result in unique behavior in aqueous environment .
figure seven  .  one  two depict the structure of a triglyceride .
because all three substituent on the glycerol backbone be long hydrocarbon chain , these compound be nonpolar and not significantly attract to polar water molecule
- - pron - be hydrophobic .
conversely , phospholipid such as the one show in figure seven  .  one  three have a negatively charge phosphate group .
because the phosphate be charge , - pron - be capable of strong attraction to water molecule and thus be hydrophilic , or “ water loving .
"
the hydrophilic portion of the phospholipid be often refer to as a polar “ head , " and the long hydrocarbon chain as nonpolar “ tail .
"
a molecule present a hydrophobic portion and a hydrophilic moiety be say to be amphipathic .
notice the “ r " designation within the hydrophilic head depict in figure seven  .  one  three , indicate that a polar head group can be more complex than a simple phosphate moiety .
glycolipid be example in which carbohydrate be bond to the lipid ' head group .
chapter seven
 microbial biochemistry two  nine  seven
the amphipathic nature of phospholipid enable - pron - to form uniquely functional structure in aqueous environment .
as mention , the polar head of these molecule be strongly attract to water molecule , and the nonpolar tail be not .
because of - pron - considerable length , these tail be , in fact , strongly attract to one another .
as a result , energetically stable , large - scale assembly of phospholipid molecule be form in which the hydrophobic tail congregate within enclosed region , shield from contact with water by the polar head ( figure seven  .  one  four ) .
the simple of these structure be micelle , spherical assembly contain a hydrophobic interior of phospholipid tail and an outer surface of polar head group .
large and more complex structure be create from lipid - bilayer sheet , or unit membrane , which be large , two - dimensional assembly of phospholipid congregate tail to tail .
the cell membrane of nearly all organism be make from lipid - bilayer sheet , as be the membrane of many intracellular component .
these sheet may also form lipid - bilayer sphere that be the structural basis of vesicle and liposome , subcellular component that play a role in numerous physiological function .
figure seven  .  one  four
phospholipids tend to arrange - pron - in aqueous solution form liposome , micelle , or lipid bilayer sheet .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villarreal )

how be the amphipathic nature of phospholipid significant ?
isoprenoids and sterols
the isoprenoid be branch lipid , also refer to as terpenoid , that be form by chemical modification of the isoprene molecule ( figure seven  .  one  five ) .
these lipid play a wide variety of physiological role in plant and animal , with many technological use as pharmaceutical ( capsaicin ) , pigment ( e . g . , orange beta carotene , xanthophyll ) , and fragrance ( e . g . , menthol , camphor , limonene [ lemon fragrance ] , and pinene [ pine fragrance ] ) .
long - chain isoprenoid be also find in hydrophobic oil and wax .
wax be typically water resistant and hard at room temperature , but - pron - soften when heated and liquefy if warm adequately .
in human , the main wax production occur within the sebaceous gland of hair follicle in the skin , result in a secreted material call sebum , which consist mainly of triacylglycerol , wax ester , and the hydrocarbon squalene .
there be many bacteria in the microbiota on the skin that feed on these lipid .
one of the most prominent bacteria that feed on lipid be propionibacterium acne , which use the skin 's lipid to generate short - chain fatty acid and be involve in the production of acne .
two  nine  eight chapter seven

microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  one  five
five - carbon isoprene molecule be chemically modify in various way to yield isoprenoid .
another type of lipid be steroid , complex , ringed structure that be find in cell membrane  some function as hormone .
the most common type of steroid be sterol , which be steroid contain an oh group .
these be mainly hydrophobic molecule , but also have hydrophilic hydroxyl group .
the most common sterol find in animal tissue be cholesterol .
- pron - structure consist of four ring with a double bond in one of the ring , and a hydroxyl group at the sterol - define position .
the function of cholesterol be to strengthen cell membrane in eukaryote and in bacteria without cell wall , such as mycoplasma .
prokaryote generally do not produce cholesterol , although bacteria produce similar compound call hopanoid , which be also multiringe structure that strengthen bacterial membrane ( figure seven  .  one  six ) .
fungi and some protozoa produce a similar compound call ergosterol , which strengthen the cell membrane of these organism .
figure seven  .  one  six cholesterol and hopene ( a hopanoid compound ) be molecule that reinforce the structure of the cell membrane in eukaryote and prokaryote , respectively .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry two  nine  nine
liposomes
this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two liposom ) provide additional information about phospholipid and liposome .

how be isoprenoid use in technology ?
part two
the moisturize cream prescribe by penny 's doctor be a topical corticosteroid cream contain hydrocortisone .
hydrocortisone be a synthetic form of cortisol , a corticosteroid hormone produce in the adrenal gland , from cholesterol .
when apply directly to the skin , - pron - can reduce inflammation and temporarily relieve minor skin irritation , itch , and rash by reduce the secretion of histamine , a compound produce by cell of the immune system in response to the presence of pathogen or other foreign substance .
because histamine trigger the body 's inflammatory response , the ability of hydrocortisone to reduce the local production of histamine in the skin effectively suppress the immune system and help limit inflammation and accompany symptom such as pruritus ( itching ) and rash .

do the corticosteroid cream treat the cause of penny 's rash , or just the symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
seven  .  four protein learning objectives
 describe the fundamental structure of an amino acid

describe the chemical structure of protein 
summarize the unique characteristic of protein at the beginning of this chapter , a famous experiment be describe in which scientist synthesize amino acid under condition simulate those present on earth long before the evolution of life as - pron - know - pron - .
these compound be capable of bond together in essentially any number , yield molecule of essentially any size that possess a wide array of physical and chemical property and perform numerous function vital to all organism .
the molecule derive from amino acid can function as structural component of cell and subcellular entity , as source of nutrient , as atom - and energy - storage reservoir , and as functional specie such as hormone , enzyme , receptor , and transport molecule .
link to learning clinical focus three  zero  zero chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five amino acids and peptide bonds
an amino acid be an organic molecule in which a hydrogen atom , a carboxyl group ( –cooh ) , and an amino group ( –nh two ) be all bond to the same carbon atom , the so - call α carbon .
the fourth group bond to the α carbon vary among the different amino acid and be call a residue or a side chain , represent in structural formula by the letter
r . a residue be a monomer that result when two or more amino acid combine and remove water molecule .
the primary structure of a protein , a peptide chain , be make of amino acid residue .
the unique characteristic of the functional group and r group allow these component of the amino acid to form hydrogen , ionic , and disulfide bond , along with polar / nonpolar interaction need to form secondary , tertiary , and quaternary protein structure .
these group be compose primarily of carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and sulfur , in the form of hydrocarbon , acid , amide , alcohol , and amine .
a few example illustrate these possibility be provide in figure seven  .  one  seven .
figure seven  .  one  seven amino acid may chemically bond together by reaction of the carboxylic acid group of one molecule with the amine group of another .
this reaction form a peptide bond and a water molecule and be another example of dehydration synthesis ( figure seven  .  one  eight ) .
molecule form by chemically link relatively modest number of amino acid ( approximately five  zero or few ) be call peptide , and prefix be often use to specify these number  dipeptide ( two amino acid ) , tripeptide ( three amino acid ) , and so forth .
more generally , the approximate number of amino acid be designate  oligopeptide be form by join up to approximately two  zero amino acid , whereas polypeptide be synthesize from up to approximately five  zero amino acid .
when the number of amino acid link together become very large , or when multiple polypeptide be use as building subunit , the macromolecule that result be call protein .
the continuously variable length ( the number of monomer ) of these biopolymer , along with the variety of possible r group on each amino acid , allow for a nearly unlimited diversity in the type of protein that may be form .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry three  zero  one
figure seven  .  one  eight peptide bond formation be a dehydration synthesis reaction .
the carboxyl group of the first amino acid ( alanine ) be link to the amino group of the incoming second amino acid ( alanine ) .
in the process , a molecule of water be release .
 how many amino acid be in polypeptide ?
protein structure
the size ( length ) and specific amino acid sequence of a protein be major determinant of - pron - shape , and the shape of a protein be critical to - pron - function .
for example , in the process of biological nitrogen fixation ( see biogeochemical cycles ) , soil microorganism collectively know as rhizobia symbiotically interact with root of legume plant such as soybean , peanut , or bean to form a novel structure call a nodule on the plant root .
the plant then produce a carrier protein call leghemoglobin , a protein that carry nitrogen or oxygen .
leghemoglobin bind with a very high affinity to - pron - substrate oxygen at a specific region of the protein where the shape and amino acid sequence be appropriate ( the active site ) .
if the shape or chemical environment of the active site be alter , even slightly , the substrate may not be able to bind as strongly , or - pron - may not bind at all .
thus , for the protein to be fully active , - pron - must have the appropriate shape for - pron - function .
protein structure be categorize in term of four level  primary , secondary , tertiary , and quaternary .
the primary structure be simply the sequence of amino acid that make up the polypeptide chain .
figure seven  .  one  nine depict the primary structure of a protein .
the chain of amino acid that define a protein
's primary structure be not rigid , but instead be flexible because of the nature of the bond that hold the amino acid together .
when the chain be sufficiently long , hydrogen bonding may occur between amine and carbonyl functional group within the peptide backbone ( exclude the r side group ) , result in localized folding of the polypeptide chain into helix and sheet .
these shape constitute a protein 's secondary structure .
the most common secondary structure be the α - helix and β - pleated sheet .
in the α - helix structure , the helix be hold by hydrogen bond between the oxygen atom in a carbonyl group of one amino acid and the hydrogen atom of the amino group that be just four amino acid unit farther along the chain .
in the β - pleat sheet , the pleat be form by similar hydrogen bond between continuous sequence of carbonyl and amino group that be further separate on the backbone of the polypeptide chain ( figure seven  .  two  zero ) .
the next level of protein organization be the tertiary structure , which be the large - scale three - dimensional shape of a single polypeptide chain .
tertiary structure be determine by interaction between amino acid residue that be far apart in the chain .
a variety of interaction give rise to protein tertiary structure , such as disulfide bridge , which be bond between the sulfhydryl ( –sh ) functional group on amino acid side group  hydrogen bond  ionic bond  and hydrophobic interaction between nonpolar side chain .
all these interaction , weak and strong , combine to determine the final three - dimensional shape of the protein and - pron - function ( figure seven  .  two  one ) .
the process by which a polypeptide chain assume
a large - scale , three - dimensional shape be call protein folding .
folded protein that be fully functional in - pron - normal biological role be say to possess a native structure .
when three  zero  two chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
a protein lose - pron - three - dimensional shape , - pron - may no longer be functional .
these unfold protein be denature .
denaturation imply the loss of the secondary structure and tertiary structure ( and , if present , the quaternary structure ) without the loss of the primary structure .
some protein be assembly of several separate polypeptide , also know as protein subunit .
these protein function adequately only when all subunit be present and appropriately configure .
the interaction that hold these subunit together constitute the quaternary structure of the protein .
the overall quaternary structure be stabilize by relatively weak interaction .
hemoglobin , for example , have a quaternary structure of four globular protein subunit  two α and two β polypeptide , each one contain an iron - base heme ( figure seven  .  two  two ) .
another important class of protein be the conjugated protein that have a nonprotein portion .
if the conjugate protein have a carbohydrate attach , - pron - be call a glycoprotein .
if - pron - have a lipid attach , - pron - be call a lipoprotein .
these protein be important component of membrane .
figure seven  .  two  three summarize the four level of protein structure .
figure seven  .  one  nine
the primary structure of a protein be the sequence of amino acid .
( credit  modification of work by national human genome research institute ) chapter seven
 microbial biochemistry three  zero  three figure seven  .  two  zero
the secondary structure of a protein may be an α - helix or a β - pleat sheet , or both .
figure seven  .  two  one
the tertiary structure of protein be determine by a variety of attractive force , include hydrophobic interaction , ionic bonding , hydrogen bonding , and disulfide linkage .
three  zero  four chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  two  two
a hemoglobin molecule have two α and two β polypeptide together with four heme group .
figure seven  .  two  three
protein structure have four level of organization .
( credit  modification of work by national human genome research institute )

what can happen if a protein 's primary , secondary , tertiary , or quaternary structure be change ?
primary structure , dysfunctional proteins , and cystic fibrosis proteins associate with biological membrane be classify as extrinsic or intrinsic .
extrinsic protein , also call peripheral protein , be loosely associate with one side of the membrane .
intrinsic protein , or integral protein , be embed in the membrane and often function as part of transport system as transmembrane micro connections chapter seven  microbial biochemistry three  zero  five protein .
cystic fibrosis ( cf ) be a human genetic disorder cause by a change in the transmembrane protein .
- pron - affect mostly the lung but may also affect the pancrea , liver , kidney , and intestine .
cf be cause by a loss of the amino acid phenylalanine in a cystic fibrosis transmembrane protein ( cftr ) .
the loss of one amino acid change the primary structure of a protein that normally help transport salt and water in and out of cell ( figure seven  .  two  four ) .
the change in the primary structure prevent the protein from function properly , which cause the body to produce unusually thick mucus that clog the lung and lead to the accumulation of sticky mucus .
the mucus obstruct the pancrea and stop natural enzyme from help the body break down food and absorb vital nutrient .
in the lung of individual with cystic fibrosis , the altered mucus provide an environment where bacteria can thrive .
this colonization lead to the formation of biofilm in the small airway of the lung .
the most common pathogen find in the lung of patient with cystic fibrosis be pseudomonas aeruginosa ( figure seven  .  two  five ) and burkholderia cepacia .
pseudomonas differentiate within the biofilm in the lung and form large colony , call “ mucoid " pseudomonas .
the colony have a unique pigmentation that show up in laboratory test ( figure seven  .  two  five ) and provide physician with the first clue that the patient have cf ( such colony be rare in healthy individual ) .
figure seven  .  two  four
the normal cftr protein be a channel protein that help salt ( sodium chloride ) move in and out of cell .
three  zero  six chapter seven 
microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  two  five ( a ) a scan electron micrograph show the opportunistic bacterium pseudomonas aeruginosa .
( b ) pigment - produce p . aeruginosa on cetrimide agar show the green pigment call pyocyanin .
( credit a  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
for more information about cystic fibrosis , visit the cystic fibrosis foundation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cystfibrofoun ) website .
seven  .  five use biochemistry to identify microorganisms learning objectives

describe example of biosynthesis product within a cell that can be detect to identify bacteria accurate identification of bacterial isolate be essential in a clinical microbiology laboratory because the result often inform decision about treatment that directly affect patient outcome .
for example , case of food poisoning require accurate identification of the causative agent so that physician can prescribe appropriate treatment .
likewise , - pron - be important to accurately identify the causative pathogen during an outbreak of disease so that appropriate strategy can be employ to contain the epidemic .
there be many way to detect , characterize , and identify microorganism .
some method rely on phenotypic biochemical characteristic , while other use genotypic identification .
the biochemical characteristic of a bacterium provide many trait that be useful for classification and identification .
analyze the nutritional and metabolic capability of the bacterial isolate be a common approach for determine the genus and the specie of the bacterium .
some of the most important metabolic pathway that bacteria use to survive will be discuss in microbial metabolism .
in this section , - pron - will discuss a few method that use biochemical characteristic to identify microorganism .
some microorganism store certain compound as granule within - pron - cytoplasm , and the content of these granule can be use for identification purpose .
for example , poly - β - hydroxybutyrate ( phb ) be a carbon - and energy - storage link to learning chapter seven

microbial biochemistry three  zero  seven compound find in some nonfluorescent bacteria of the genus pseudomonas .
different specie within this genus can be classify by the presence or the absence of phb and fluorescent pigment .
the human pathogen p . aeruginosa and the plant pathogen p . syringae be two example of fluorescent pseudomonas specie that do not accumulate phb granule .
other system rely on biochemical characteristic to identify microorganism by - pron - biochemical reaction , such as carbon utilization and other metabolic test .
in small laboratory setting or in teach laboratory , those assay be carry out use a limited number of test tube .
however , more modern system , such as the one develop by biolog , inc . , be base on panel of biochemical reaction perform simultaneously and analyze by software .
biolog 's system identifie cell base on - pron - ability to metabolize certain biochemical and on - pron - physiological property , include ph and chemical sensitivity .
- pron - use all major class of biochemical in - pron - analysis .
identification can be perform manually or with the semi - or fully automate instrument .
another automate system identify microorganism by determine the speciman 's mass spectrum and then compare - pron - to a database that contain know mass spectra for thousand of microorganism .
this method be base on matrix - assist laser desorption / ionization time - of - flight mass spectrometry ( maldi - tof ) and use disposable maldi plate on which the microorganism be mix with a specialized matrix reagent ( figure seven  .  two  six ) .
the sample / reagent mixture be irradiate with a high - intensity pulse ultraviolet laser , result in the ejection of gaseous ion generate from the various chemical constituent of the microorganism .
these gaseous ion be collect and accelerate through the mass spectrometer , with ion travel at a velocity determine by - pron - mass - to - charge ratio ( m / z ) , thus , reach the detector at different time .
a plot of detector signal versus m /
z yield a mass spectrum for the organism that be uniquely related to - pron - biochemical composition .
comparison of the mass spectrum to a library of reference spectra obtain from identical analysis of know microorganism permit identification of the unknown microbe .
figure seven  .  two  six maldi - tof method be now routinely use for diagnostic procedure in clinical microbiology laboratory .
this technology be able to rapidly identify some microorganism that can not be readily identify by more traditional method .
( credit " maldi plate photo
" 
modification of work by chen q , liu t , chen g 
credit “ graph "  modification of work by bailes j , vidal l , ivanov da , soloviev m )
microbes can also be identify by measure - pron - unique lipid profile .
as - pron - have learn , fatty acid of lipid can vary in chain length , presence or absence of double bond , and number of double bond , hydroxyl group , branch , and ring .
to identify a microbe by - pron - lipid composition , the fatty acid present in - pron - membrane be analyze .
a common biochemical analysis use for this purpose be a technique use in clinical , public health , and food laboratory .
- pron - rely on detect unique difference in fatty acid and be call fatty acid methyl est ( fame ) analysis .
in a fame analysis , fatty acid be extract from the membrane of microorganism , chemically alter to form volatile methyl ester , and analyze by gas chromatography ( gc ) .
the result gc chromatogram be compare with reference chromatogram in a database contain datum for thousand of bacterial isolate to identify the unknown microorganism ( figure seven  .  two  seven ) .
three  zero  eight chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure seven  .  two  seven
fatty acid methyl est ( fame ) analysis in bacterial identification result in a chromatogram unique to each bacterium .
each peak in the gas chromatogram correspond to a particular fatty acid methyl est and - pron - height be proportional to the amount present in the cell .
( credit “ culture
" 
modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention
 credit “ graph
" 
modification of work by zhang p . and liu p . )
a related method for microorganism identification be call phospholipid - derive fatty acid ( plfa ) analysis .
membrane be mostly compose of phospholipid , which can be saponify ( hydrolyze with alkali ) to release the fatty acid .
the result fatty acid mixture be then subject to fame analysis , and the measure lipid profile can be compare with those of know microorganism to identify the unknown microorganism .
bacterial identification can also be base on the protein produce under specific growth condition within the human body .
these type of identification procedure be call proteomic analysis .
to perform proteomic analysis , protein from the pathogen be first separate by high - pressure liquid chromatography ( hplc ) , and the collect fraction be then digest to yield small peptide fragment .
these peptide be identify by mass spectrometry and compare with those of know microorganism to identify the unknown microorganism in the original speciman .
microorganism can also be identify by the carbohydrate attach to protein ( glycoprotein ) in the plasma membrane or cell wall .
antibody and other carbohydrate - bind protein can attach to specific carbohydrate on cell surface , cause the cell to clump together .
serological test ( e . g . , the lancefield group test , which be use for identification of streptococcus specie ) be perform to detect the unique carbohydrate locate on the surface of the cell .
resolution penny stop use - pron - new sunscreen and apply the corticosteroid cream to - pron - rash as direct .
however , after several day , - pron - rash have not improve and actually seem to be get bad .
- pron - make a follow - up appointment with - pron - doctor , who observe a bumpy red rash and pu - fill blister around hair follicle ( figure seven  .  two  eight ) .
the rash be especially concentrate in area that would have be cover by a swimsuit .
after some questioning , penny tell the physician that - pron - have recently attend a pool party and spend some time in a hot tub .
in light of this new information , the doctor suspect a case of hot tub rash , an infection frequently cause by the bacterium pseudomonas aeruginosa , an opportunistic pathogen that can thrive in hot tub and swimming pool , especially when the water be not sufficiently chlorinate .
p . aeruginosa be the same bacterium that be associate with infection in the lung of patient with cystic fibrosis .
the doctor collect a specimen from penny 's rash to be send to the clinical microbiology lab .
confirmatory test be carry out to distinguish p . aeruginosa from enteric pathogen that can also be present in pool and hot - tub water .
the test include the production of the blue - green pigment pyocyanin on cetrimide agar and clinical focus chapter seven  microbial biochemistry three  zero  nine growth at four  two ° c .
cetrimide be a selective agent that inhibit the growth of other specie of microbial flora and also enhance the production of p . aeruginosa pigment pyocyanin and fluorescein , which be a characteristic blue - green and yellow - green , respectively .
test confirm the presence of p . aeruginosa in penny 's skin sample , but the doctor decide not to prescribe an antibiotic .
even though p . aeruginosa be a bacterium , pseudomonas specie be generally resistant to many antibiotic .
luckily , skin infection like penny 's be usually self - limit  the rash typically last about two week and resolve on - pron - own , with or without medical treatment .
the doctor advise penny to wait - pron - out and keep use the corticosteroid cream .
the cream will not kill the p . aeruginosa on penny 's skin , but - pron - should calm - pron - rash and minimize the itching by suppress - pron - body 's inflammatory response to the bacteria .
figure seven  .  two  eight exposure to pseudomonas aeruginosa in the water of a pool or hot tub can sometimes cause a skin infection that manifest as " hot tub rash .
"
( credit  modification of work by “ lsupellmel” / wikimedia commons ) go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary seven  .  one organic molecules

the most abundant element in cell be hydrogen , carbon , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , and sulfur .

life be carbon base .
each carbon atom can bind to another one produce a carbon skeleton that can be straight , branch , or ring shape .

the same number and type of atom may bond together in different way to yield different molecule call isomer .
isomer may differ in the bonding sequence of - pron - atom ( structural isomer ) or in the spatial arrangement of atom whose bonding sequence be the same ( stereoisomer ) , and - pron - physical and chemical property may vary slightly or drastically .

functional group confer specific chemical property to molecule bear - pron - .
common functional group in biomolecule be hydroxyl , methyl , carbonyl , carboxyl , amino , phosphate , and sulfhydryl .

macromolecule be polymer assemble from individual unit , the monomer , which bind together like building block .
many biologically significant macromolecule be form by dehydration synthesis , a process in which monomer bind together by combine - pron - functional group and generate water molecule as byproduct .
seven  .  two carbohydrates  carbohydrates , the most abundant biomolecule on earth , be widely use by organism for structural and energy - storage purpose .
 carbohydrate include individual sugar molecule ( monosaccharide ) as well as two or more molecule chemically link by glycosidic bond .
monosaccharide be classify base on the number of carbon the three  one  zero chapter seven  microbial biochemistry
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five molecule as triose ( three c ) , tetrose ( four c ) , pentose ( five c ) , and hexose ( six c ) .
- pron - be the building block for the synthesis of polymer or complex carbohydrate .

disaccharides such as sucrose , lactose , and maltose be molecule compose of two monosaccharide link together by a glycosidic bond .
 polysaccharides , or glycan , be polymer compose of hundred of monosaccharide monomer link together by glycosidic bond .
the energy - storage polymer starch and glycogen be example of polysaccharide and be all compose of branched chain of glucose molecule .

the polysaccharide cellulose be a common structural component of the cell wall of organism .
other structural polysaccharide , such as n - acetyl glucosamine ( nag ) and n - acetyl muramic acid ( nam ) , incorporate modified glucose molecule and be use in the construction of peptidoglycan or chitin .
seven  .  three lipids 
lipid be compose mainly of carbon and hydrogen , but - pron - can also contain oxygen , nitrogen , sulfur , and phosphorous .
- pron - provide nutrient for organism , store carbon and energy , play structural role in membrane , and function as hormone , pharmaceutical , fragrance , and pigment .

fatty acid be long - chain hydrocarbon with a carboxylic acid functional group .
- pron - relatively long nonpolar hydrocarbon chain make - pron - hydrophobic .
fatty acid with no double bond be saturate  those with double bond be unsaturated .

fatty acid chemically bond to glycerol to form structurally essential lipid such as triglyceride and phospholipid .
triglyceride comprise three fatty acid bond to glycerol , yield a hydrophobic molecule .
phospholipid contain both hydrophobic hydrocarbon chain and polar head group , make - pron - amphipathic and capable of form uniquely functional large scale structure .

biological membrane be large - scale structure base on phospholipid bilayer that provide hydrophilic exterior and interior surface suitable for aqueous environment , separate by an intervene hydrophobic layer .
these bilayer be the structural basis for cell membrane in most organism , as well as subcellular component such as vesicle .

isoprenoid be lipid derive from isoprene molecule that have many physiological role and a variety of commercial application .

a wax be a long - chain isoprenoid that be typically water resistant  an example of a wax - contain substance be sebum , produce by sebaceous gland in the skin .
steroid be lipid with complex , ringed structure that function as structural component of cell membrane and as hormone .
sterol be a subclass of steroid contain a hydroxyl group at a specific location on one of the molecule 's ring  one example be cholesterol .
 bacteria produce hopanoid , structurally similar to cholesterol , to strengthen bacterial membrane .
fungi and protozoa produce a strengthen agent call ergosterol .
seven  .  four proteins 
amino acid be small molecule essential to all life .
each have an α carbon to which a hydrogen atom , carboxyl group , and amine group be bond .
the fourth bond group , represent by r , vary in chemical composition , size , polarity , and charge among different amino acid , provide variation in property .

peptide be polymer form by the linkage of amino acid via dehydration synthesis .
the bond between the link amino acid be call peptide bond .
the number of amino acid link together may vary from a few to many .

protein be polymer form by the linkage of a very large number of amino acid .
- pron - perform many important function in a cell , serve as nutrient and enzyme  storage molecule for carbon , nitrogen , and energy  and structural component .

the structure of a protein be a critical determinant of - pron - function and be describe by a graduate classification  primary , secondary , tertiary , and quaternary .
the native structure of a protein may be disrupt by denaturation , result in loss of - pron - high - order structure and - pron - biological function .

some protein be form by several separate protein subunit , the interaction of these subunit compose the quaternary structure of the protein complex .
chapter seven  microbial biochemistry three  one  one
 conjugated protein have a nonpolypeptide portion that can be a carbohydrate ( form a glycoprotein ) or a lipid fraction ( form a lipoprotein ) .
these protein be important component of membrane .
seven  .  five use biochemistry to identify microorganisms

accurate identification of bacteria be essential in a clinical laboratory for diagnostic and management of epidemic , pandemic , and food poisoning cause by bacterial outbreak .

the phenotypic identification of microorganism involve use observable trait , include profile of structural component such as lipid , biosynthetic product such as sugar or amino acid , or storage compound such as poly - β - hydroxybutyrate .

an unknown microbe may be identify from the unique mass spectrum produce when - pron - be analyze by matrix assist laser desorption / ionization time of flight mass spectrometry ( maldi - tof ) .

microbes can be identify by determine - pron - lipid composition , use fatty acid methyl ester ( fame ) or phospholipid - derive fatty acid ( plfa ) analysis .
 proteomic analysis , the study of all accumulate protein of an organism  can also be use for bacterial identification .

glycoproteins in the plasma membrane or cell wall structure can bind to lectin or antibody and can be use for identification .
chapter eight microbial metabolism figure eight  .  one prokaryotes have great metabolic diversity with important consequence to other form of life .
acidic mine drainage ( leave ) be a serious environmental problem result from the introduction of water and oxygen to sulfideoxidize bacteria during mining process .
these bacteria produce large amount of sulfuric acid as a byproduct of - pron - metabolism , result in a low - ph environment that can kill many aquatic plant and animal .
on the other hand , some prokaryote be essential to other life form .
root nodule of many plant ( right ) house nitrogen - fix bacteria that convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia , provide a usable nitrogen source for these plant .
( credit leave  modification of work by d . hardesty , usgs columbia environment research center  credit right 
modification of work by celmow sr , clairmont l , madsen lh , and guinel fc ) chapter outline eight  .  one energy , matter , and enzymes eight  .  two catabolism of carbohydrates
eight  .  three cellular respiration eight  .  four fermentation eight  .  five catabolism of lipids and proteins eight  .  six
photosynthesis eight  .  seven biogeochemical cycles introduction throughout earth
's history , microbial metabolism have be a drive force behind the development and maintenance of the planet 's biosphere .
eukaryotic organism such as plant and animal typically depend on organic molecule for energy , growth , and reproduction .
prokaryote , on the other hand , can metabolize a wide range of organic as well as inorganic matter , from complex organic molecule like cellulose to inorganic molecule and ion such as atmospheric nitrogen ( n two ) , molecular hydrogen ( h two ) , sulfide ( s two − ) , manganese ( ii ) ion ( mn two + ) , ferrous iron ( fe two + ) , and ferric iron ( fe three + ) , to name a few .
by metabolize such substance , microbe chemically convert - pron - to other form .
in some case , microbial metabolism produce chemical that can be harmful to other organism  in other , - pron - produce substance that be essential to the metabolism and survival of other life form ( figure eight  .  one ) .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  one  seven
eight  .  one energy , matter , and enzymes learning objectives  define and describe metabolism
 compare and contrast autotroph and heterotroph 
describe the importance of oxidation - reduction reaction in metabolism 
describe why atp , fad , nad+ , and nadp+ be important in a cell

identify the structure and structural component of an enzyme
 describe the difference between competitive and noncompetitive enzyme inhibitor
the term use to describe all of the chemical reaction inside a cell be metabolism ( figure eight  .  two ) .
cellular process such as the building or break down of complex molecule occur through series of stepwise , interconnect chemical reaction call metabolic pathway .
reaction that be spontaneous and release energy be exergonic reaction , whereas endergonic reaction require energy to proceed .
the term anabolism refer to those endergonic metabolic pathway involve in biosynthesis , convert simple molecular building block into more complex molecule , and fuel by the use of cellular energy .
conversely , the term catabolism refer to exergonic pathway that break down complex molecule into simple one .
molecular energy store in the bond of complex molecule be release in catabolic pathway and harvest in such a way that - pron - can be use to produce high - energy molecule , which be use to drive anabolic pathway .
thus , in term of energy and molecule , cell be continually balance catabolism with anabolism .
part one hannah be a one  five  - month - old girl from washington state .
- pron - be spend the summer in gambia , where - pron - parent be work for a nongovernmental organization .
about three week after - pron - arrival in gambia , hannah 's appetite begin to diminish and - pron - parent notice that - pron - seem unusually sluggish , fatigued , and confused .
- pron - also seem very irritable when - pron - be outdoors , especially during the day .
when - pron - begin vomit , - pron - parent figure - pron - have catch a two  four  - hour virus , but when - pron - symptom persist , - pron - take - pron - to a clinic .
the local physician notice that hannah 's reflex seem abnormally slow , and when - pron - examine - pron - eye with a light , - pron - seem unusually light sensitive .
- pron - also seem to be experience a stiff neck .

what be some possible cause of hannah 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus three  one  eight chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  two
metabolism include catabolism and anabolism .
anabolic pathway require energy to synthesize large molecule .
catabolic pathway generate energy by break down large molecule .
both type of pathway be require for maintain the cell 's energy balance .
classification by carbon and energy source organisms can be identify accord to the source of carbon - pron - use for metabolism as well as - pron - energy source .
the prefix auto - ( " self " ) and
hetero - ( " other " ) refer to the origin of the carbon source various organism can use .
organism that convert inorganic carbon dioxide ( co two ) into organic carbon compound be autotroph .
plant and cyanobacteria be well - know example of autotroph .
conversely , heterotroph rely on more complex organic carbon compound as nutrient  these be provide to - pron - initially by autotroph .
many organism , range from human to many prokaryote , include the well - study escherichia coli , be heterotrophic .
organism can also be identify by the energy source - pron - use .
all energy be derive from the transfer of electron , but the source of electron differ between various type of organism .
the prefix photo -
( " light " ) and
chemo - ( " chemical " ) refer to the energy source that various organism use .
those that get - pron - energy for electron transfer from light be phototroph , whereas chemotroph obtain energy for electron transfer by break chemical bond .
there be two type of chemotroph  organotroph and lithotroph .
organotrophs , include human , fungus , and many prokaryote , be chemotroph that obtain energy from organic compound .
lithotrophs ( " litho
" mean “ rock " ) be chemotroph that get energy from inorganic compound , include hydrogen sulfide ( h two s ) and reduced iron .
lithotrophy be unique to the microbial world .
the strategy use to obtain both carbon and energy can be combine for the classification of organism accord to nutritional type .
most organism be chemoheterotroph because - pron - use organic molecule as both - pron - electron and carbon source .
table eight  .  one summarize this and the other classification .
classification of organisms by energy and carbon source
classifications energy source carbon source examples chemoautotrophs chemical inorganic
hydrogen - , sulfur - , iron - , nitrogen - , and carbon monoxide - oxidize bacteria
chemotrophs chemoheterotrophs chemical organic compound all animal , most fungi , protozoa , and bacteria photoautotrophs light inorganic
all plant , algae , cyanobacteria , and green and purple sulfur bacteria phototrophs photoheterotrophs light organic compound green and purple nonsulfur bacteria , heliobacteria table eight  .  one chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  one  nine

explain the difference between catabolism and anabolism .

explain the difference between autotroph and heterotroph .
oxidation and reduction in metabolism
the transfer of electron between molecule be important because most of the energy store in atom and use to fuel cell function be in the form of high - energy electron .
the transfer of energy in the form of electron allow the cell to transfer and use energy incrementally  that is , in small package rather than a single , destructive burst .
reaction that remove electron from donor molecule , leave - pron - oxidize , be oxidation reaction  those that add electron to acceptor molecule , leave - pron - reduce , be reduction reaction .
because electron can move from one molecule to another , oxidation and reduction occur in tandem .
these pair of reaction be call oxidation - reduction reaction , or redox reaction .
energy carrier  nad+ , nadp+ , fad , and atp
the energy release from the breakdown of the chemical bond within nutrient can be store either through the reduction of electron carrier or in the bond of adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
in living system , a small class of compound function as mobile electron carrier , molecule that bind to and shuttle high - energy electron between compound in pathway .
the principal electron carrier - pron - will consider originate from the b vitamin group and be derivative of nucleotide  - pron - be nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide , nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate , and flavin adenine dinucleotide .
these compound can be easily reduce or oxidize .
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( nad+ / nadh ) be the most common mobile electron carrier use in catabolism .
nad+ be the oxidize form of the molecule  nadh be the reduce form of the molecule .
nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate ( nadp+ ) , the oxidize form of an nad+ variant that contain an extra phosphate group , be another important electron carrier  - pron - form nadph when reduce .
the oxidize form of flavin adenine dinucleotide be fad , and - pron - reduce form be fadh two .
both nad+ / nadh and fad / fadh two be extensively use in energy extraction from sugar during catabolism in chemoheterotroph , whereas nadp+ / nadph play an important role in anabolic reaction and photosynthesis .
collectively , fadh two , nadh , and nadph be often refer to as have reduce power due to - pron - ability to donate electron to various chemical reaction .
a live cell must be able to handle the energy release during catabolism in a way that enable the cell to store energy safely and release - pron - for use only as need .
living cell accomplish this by use the compound adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) .
atp be often call the " energy currency " of the cell , and , like currency , this versatile compound can be use to fill any energy need of the cell .
at the heart of atp be a molecule of adenosine monophosphate ( amp ) , which be compose of an adenine molecule bond to a ribose molecule and a single phosphate group .
ribose be a five - carbon sugar find in rna , and amp be one of the nucleotide in rna .
the addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule result in the formation of adenosine diphosphate ( adp )  the addition of a third phosphate group form atp ( figure eight  .  three ) .
add a phosphate group to a molecule , a process call phosphorylation , require energy .
phosphate group be negatively charge and thus repel one another when - pron - be arrange in series , as - pron - be in adp and atp .
this repulsion make the adp and atp molecule inherently unstable .
thus , the bond between phosphate group ( one in adp and two in atp ) be call high - energy phosphate bond .
when these highenergy bond be break to release one phosphate ( call inorganic phosphate
[ pi ] ) or two connected phosphate group ( call pyrophosphate [ ppi ] ) from atp through a process call dephosphorylation , energy be release to drive endergonic reaction ( figure eight  .  four ) .
three  two  zero chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  three
the energy release from dephosphorylation of atp be use to drive cellular work , include anabolic pathway .
atp be regenerate through phosphorylation , harness the energy find in chemical or from sunlight .
( credit  modification of work by robert bear , david rintoul )
figure eight  .  four exergonic reaction be couple to endergonic one , make the combination favorable .
here , the endergonic reaction of atp phosphorylation be couple to the exergonic reaction of catabolism .
similarly , the exergonic reaction of atp dephosphorylation be couple to the endergonic reaction of polypeptide formation , an example of anabolism .

what be the function of an electron carrier ?
enzyme structure and function a substance that help speed up a chemical reaction be a catalyst .
catalyst be not use or change during chemical reaction and , therefore , be reusable .
whereas inorganic molecule may serve as catalyst for a wide range of chemical reaction , protein call enzyme serve as catalyst for biochemical reaction inside cell .
enzyme thus play an important role in control cellular metabolism .
an enzyme function by lower the activation energy of a chemical reaction inside the cell .
activation energy be the energy need to form or break chemical bond and convert reactant to product ( figure eight  .  five ) .
enzyme lower the activation energy by bind to the reactant molecule and hold - pron - in such a way as to speed up the reaction .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  two  one
the chemical reactant to which an enzyme bind be call substrate , and the location within the enzyme where the substrate bind be call the enzyme 's active site .
the characteristic of the amino acid near the active site create a very specific chemical environment within the active site that induce suitability to bind , albeit briefly , to a specific substrate ( or substrate ) .
due to this jigsaw puzzle - like match between an enzyme and - pron - substrate , enzyme be know for - pron - specificity .
in fact , as an enzyme bind to - pron - substrate ( s ) , the enzyme structure change slightly to find the good fit between the transition state ( a structural intermediate between the substrate and product ) and the active site , just as a rubber glove mold to a hand insert into - pron - .
this active - site modification in the presence of substrate , along with the simultaneous formation of the transition state , be call induced fit ( figure eight  .  six ) .
overall , there be a specifically match enzyme for each substrate and , thus , for each chemical reaction  however , there be some flexibility as well .
some enzyme have the ability to act on several different structurally relate substrate .
figure eight  .  five enzyme lower the activation energy of a chemical reaction .
figure eight  .  six
accord to the induce - fit model , the active site of the enzyme undergoe conformational change upon bind with the substrate .
enzyme be subject to influence by local environmental condition such as ph , substrate concentration , and temperature .
although increase the environmental temperature generally increase reaction rate , enzyme catalyze or otherwise , increase or decrease the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bond within the active site , make - pron - less well suited to bind substrate .
high temperature will eventually cause enzyme , like other biological molecule , to denature , lose - pron - three - dimensional structure and function .
enzyme be also suit to function good within a certain ph range , and , as with temperature , extreme environmental ph value ( acidic or basic ) can cause enzyme to denature .
active - site amino - acid side chain have - pron - own acidic or basic property that be optimal for catalysis and , therefore , be sensitive to change in ph .
another factor that influence enzyme activity be substrate concentration  enzyme activity be increase at high three  two  two chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five concentration of substrate until - pron - reach a saturation point at which the enzyme can bind no additional substrate .
overall , enzyme be optimize to work good under the environmental condition in which the organism that produce - pron - live .
for example , while microbe that inhabit hot spring have enzyme that work good at high temperature , human pathogen have enzyme that work good at three  seven ° c .
similarly , while enzyme produce by most organism work good at a neutral ph , microbe grow in acidic environment make enzyme optimize to low ph condition , allow for - pron - growth at those condition .
many enzyme do not work optimally , or even at all , unless bind to other specific nonprotein helper molecule , either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bond or permanently through strong covalent bond .
bind to these molecule promote optimal conformation and function for - pron - respective enzyme .
two type of helper molecule be cofactor and coenzyme .
cofactor be inorganic ion such as iron ( fe two + ) and magnesium ( mg two + ) that help stabilize enzyme conformation and function .
one example of an enzyme that require a metal ion as a cofactor be the enzyme that build dna molecule , dna polymerase , which require a bind zinc ion ( zn two + ) to function .
coenzyme be organic helper molecule that be require for enzyme action .
like enzyme , - pron - be not consume and , hence , be reusable .
the most common source of coenzyme be dietary vitamin .
some vitamin be precursor to coenzyme and other act directly as coenzyme .
some cofactor and coenzyme , like coenzyme a ( coa ) , often bind to the enzyme 's active site , aid in the chemistry of the transition of a substrate to a product ( figure eight  .  seven ) .
in such case , an enzyme lack a necessary cofactor or coenzyme be call an apoenzyme and be inactive .
conversely , an enzyme with the necessary associate cofactor or coenzyme be call a holoenzyme and be active .
nadh and atp be also both example of commonly use coenzyme that provide high - energy electron or phosphate group , respectively , which bind to enzyme , thereby activate - pron - .
figure eight  .  seven
the bind of a coenzyme or cofactor to an apoenzyme be often require to form an active holoenzyme .

what role do enzyme play in a chemical reaction ?
enzyme inhibitors enzymes can be regulate in way that either promote or reduce - pron - activity .
there be many different kind of molecule that inhibit or promote enzyme function , and various mechanism exist for do so ( figure eight  .  eight ) .
a competitive inhibitor be a molecule similar enough to a substrate that - pron - can compete with the substrate for bind to chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  two  three the active site by simply block the substrate from bind .
for a competitive inhibitor to be effective , the inhibitor concentration need to be approximately equal to the substrate concentration .
sulfa drug provide a good example of competitive competition .
- pron - be use to treat bacterial infection because - pron - bind to the active site of an enzyme within the bacterial folic acid synthesis pathway .
when present in a sufficient dose , a sulfa drug prevent folic acid synthesis , and bacteria be unable to grow because - pron - can not synthesize dna , rna , and protein .
human be unaffected because - pron - obtain folic acid from - pron - diet .
on the other hand , a noncompetitive ( allosteric ) inhibitor bind to the enzyme at an allosteric site , a location other than the active site , and still manage to block substrate bind to the active site by induce a conformational change that reduce the affinity of the enzyme for - pron - substrate ( figure eight  .  nine ) .
because only one inhibitor molecule be need per enzyme for effective inhibition , the concentration of inhibitor need for noncompetitive inhibition be typically much low than the substrate concentration .
in addition to allosteric inhibitor , there be allosteric activator that bind to location on an enzyme away from the active site , induce a conformational change that increase the affinity of the enzyme 's active site ( s ) for - pron - substrate ( s ) .
allosteric control be an important mechanism of regulation of metabolic pathway involve in both catabolism and anabolism .
in a most efficient and elegant way , cell have evolve also to use the product of - pron - own metabolic reaction for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity .
feedback inhibition involve the use of a pathway product to regulate - pron - own further production .
the cell respond to the abundance of specific product by slow production during anabolic or catabolic reaction ( figure eight  .  nine ) .
figure eight  .  eight enzyme activity can be regulate by either competitive inhibitor , which bind to the active site , or noncompetitive inhibitor , which bind to an allosteric site .
three  two  four chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  nine ( a )
bind of an allosteric inhibitor reduce enzyme activity , but bind of an allosteric activator increase enzyme activity .
( b ) feedback inhibition , where the end product of the pathway serve as a noncompetitive inhibitor to an enzyme early in the pathway , be an important mechanism of allosteric regulation in cell .

explain the difference between a competitive inhibitor and a noncompetitive inhibitor .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  two  five eight  .  two catabolism of carbohydrates learning objectives  describe why glycolysis be not oxygen dependent 
define and describe the net yield of three - carbon molecule , atp , and nadh from glycolysis

explain how three - carbon pyruvate molecule be convert into two - carbon acetyl group that can be funnel into the krebs cycle .

define and describe the net yield of co two , gtp / atp , fadh two , and nadh from the krebs cycle

explain how intermediate carbon molecule of the krebs cycle can be use in a cell extensive enzyme pathway exist for break down carbohydrate to capture energy in atp bond .
in addition , many catabolic pathway produce intermediate molecule that be also use as building block for anabolism .
understand these process be important for several reason .
first , because the main metabolic process involve be common to a wide range of chemoheterotrophic organism , - pron - can learn a great deal about human metabolism by study metabolism in more easily manipulated bacteria like e . coli .
second , because animal and human pathogen be also chemoheterotroph , learn about the detail of metabolism in these bacteria , include possible difference between bacterial and human pathway , be useful for the diagnosis of pathogen as well as for the discovery of antimicrobial therapy target specific pathogen .
last , learn specifically about the pathway involve in chemoheterotrophic metabolism also serve as a basis for compare other more unusual metabolic strategy use by microbe .
although the chemical source of electron initiate electron transfer be different between chemoheteroroph and chemoautotroph , many similar process be use in both type of organism .
the typical example use to introduce concept of metabolism to student be carbohydrate catabolism .
for chemoheterotroph , - pron - example of metabolism start with the catabolism of polysaccharide such as glycogen , starch , or cellulose .
enzyme such as amylase , which break down glycogen or starch , and cellulase , which break down cellulose , can cause the hydrolysis of glycosidic bond between the glucose monomer in these polymer , release glucose for further catabolism .
glycolysis
for bacteria , eukaryote , and most archaea , glycolysis be the most common pathway for the catabolism of glucose  - pron - produce energy , reduce electron carrier , and precursor molecule for cellular metabolism .
every live organism carry out some form of glycolysis , suggest this mechanism be an ancient universal metabolic process .
the process - pron - do not use oxygen  however , glycolysis can be couple with additional metabolic process that be either aerobic or anaerobic .
glycolysis take place in the cytoplasm of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell .
- pron - begin with a single six - carbon glucose molecule and end with two molecule of a three - carbon sugar call pyruvate .
pyruvate may be break down further after glycolysis to harness more energy through aerobic or anaerobic respiration , but many organism , include many microbe , may be unable to respire  for these organism , glycolysis may be - pron - only source of generate atp .
the type of glycolysis find in animal and that be most common in microbe be the embden - meyerhof - parnas ( emp ) pathway , name after gustav embden ( one  eight  seven  four – one  nine  three  three ) , otto meyerhof ( one  eight  eight  four – one  nine  five  one ) , and jakub parnas ( one  eight  eight  four – one  nine  four  nine ) .
glycolysis use the emp pathway consist of two distinct phase ( figure eight  .  one  zero ) .
the first part of the pathway , call the energy investment phase , use energy from two atp molecule to modify a glucose molecule so that the six - carbon sugar molecule can be split evenly into two phosphorylated three - carbon molecule call glyceraldehyde three  - phosphate ( g three p ) .
the second part of the pathway , call the energy payoff phase , extract energy by oxidize g three p to pyruvate , produce four atp molecule and reduce two molecule of nad+ to two molecule of nadh , use electron that originate from glucose .
( a discussion and illustration of the full emp pathway with chemical structure and enzyme name appear in appendix c . )
the atp molecule produce during the energy payoff phase of glycolysis be form by substrate - level three  two  six chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five phosphorylation ( figure eight  .  one  one ) , one of two mechanism for produce atp .
in substrate - level phosphorylation , a phosphate group be remove from an organic molecule and be directly transfer to an available adp molecule , produce atp .
during glycolysis , high - energy phosphate group from the intermediate molecule be add to adp to make atp .
overall , in this process of glycolysis , the net gain from the breakdown of a single glucose molecule be   two atp molecule  two nadh molecule , and  two pyruvate molecule .
figure eight  .  one  zero
the energy investment phase of the embden - meyerhof - parnas glycolysis pathway use two atp molecule to phosphorylate glucose , form two glyceraldehyde three  - phosphate ( g three p ) molecule .
the energy payoff phase harness the energy in the g three p molecule , produce four atp molecule , two nadh molecule , and two pyruvate .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  two  seven figure eight  .  one  one
the atp make during glycolysis be a result of substrate - level phosphorylation .
one of the two enzymatic reaction in the energy payoff phase of embden meyerhof - parnas glycolysis that produce atp in this way be show here .
other glycolytic pathways when - pron - refer to glycolysis , unless otherwise indicate , - pron - be refer to the emp pathway use by animal and many bacteria .
however , some prokaryote use alternative glycolytic pathway .
one important alternative be the entner - doudoroff ( ed ) pathway , name after - pron - discoverer nathan entner and michael doudoroff
( one  nine  one  one – one  nine  seven  five ) .
although some bacteria , include the opportunistic gram - negative pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa , contain only the ed pathway for glycolysis , other bacteria , like e . coli , have the ability to use either the ed pathway or the emp pathway .
a third type of glycolytic pathway that occur in all cell , which be quite different from the previous two pathway , be the pentose phosphate pathway ( ppp ) also call the phosphogluconate pathway or the hexose monophosphate shunt .
evidence suggest that the ppp may be the most ancient universal glycolytic pathway .
the intermediate from the ppp be use for the biosynthesis of nucleotide and amino acid .
therefore , this glycolytic pathway may be favor when the cell have nee for nucleic acid and / or protein synthesis , respectively .
a discussion and illustration of the complete ed pathway and ppp with chemical structure and enzyme name appear in appendix c .

when may an organism use the ed pathway or the ppp for glycolysis ?
transition reaction , coenzyme a , and the krebs cycle glycolysis produce pyruvate , which can be further oxidize to capture more energy .
for pyruvate to enter the next oxidative pathway , - pron - must first be decarboxylate by the enzyme complex pyruvate dehydrogenase to a two - carbon acetyl group in the transition reaction , also call the bridge reaction ( see appendix c and figure eight  .  one  two ) .
in the transition reaction , electron be also transfer to nad+ to form nadh .
to proceed to the next phase of this metabolic process , the comparatively tiny two - carbon acetyl must be attach to a very large carrier compound call coenzyme a ( coa ) .
the transition reaction occur in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryote  in prokaryote , - pron - occur in the cytoplasm because prokaryote lack membrane - enclose organelle .
three  two  eight chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  one  two
( a ) coenzyme a be show here without an attached acetyl group .
( b )
coenzyme a be show here with an attached acetyl group .
the krebs cycle transfer remain electron from the acetyl group produce during the transition reaction to electron carrier molecule , thus reduce - pron - .
the krebs cycle also occur in the cytoplasm of prokaryote along with glycolysis and the transition reaction , but - pron - take place in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryotic cell where the transition reaction also occur .
the krebs cycle be name after - pron - discoverer , british scientist hans adolf krebs ( one  nine  zero  zero – one  nine  eight  one )
and be also call the citric acid cycle , or the tricarboxylic acid cycle ( tca ) because citric acid have three carboxyl group in - pron - structure .
unlike glycolysis , the krebs cycle be a closed loop  the last part of the pathway regenerate the compound use in the first step ( figure eight  .  one  three ) .
the eight step of the cycle be a series of chemical reaction that capture the two - carbon acetyl group ( the coa carrier do not enter the krebs cycle ) from the transition reaction , which be add to a four - carbon intermediate in the krebs cycle , produce the six - carbon intermediate citric acid ( give the alternate name for this cycle ) .
as one turn of the cycle return to the starting point of the fourcarbon intermediate , the cycle produce two co two molecule , one atp molecule ( or an equivalent , such as guanosine triphosphate [ gtp ] ) produce by substrate - level phosphorylation , and three molecule of nadh and one of fadh two .
( a discussion and detailed illustration of the full krebs cycle appear in appendix c . )
although many organism use the krebs cycle as describe as part of glucose metabolism , several of the intermediate compound in the krebs cycle can be use in synthesize a wide variety of important cellular molecule , include amino acid , chlorophyll , fatty acid , and nucleotide  therefore , the cycle be both anabolic and catabolic ( figure eight  .  one  four ) .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  two  nine figure eight  .  one  three
the krebs cycle , also know as the citric acid cycle , be summarize here .
note income two - carbon acetyl result in the main output per turn of two co two , three nadh , one fadh two , and one atp ( or gtp ) molecule make by substrate - level phosphorylation .
two turn of the krebs cycle be require to process all of the carbon from one glucose molecule .
figure eight  .  one  four
many organism use intermediate from the krebs cycle , such as amino acid , fatty acid , and nucleotide , as building block for biosynthesis .
three  three  zero chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five eight  .  three cellular respiration learning objectives
 compare and contrast the electron transport system location and function in a prokaryotic cell and a eukaryotic cell  compare and contrast the difference between substrate - level and oxidative phosphorylation

explain the relationship between chemiosmosis and proton motive force
 describe the function and location of atp synthase in a prokaryotic versus eukaryotic cell  compare and contrast aerobic and anaerobic
respiration
- pron - have just discuss two pathway in glucose catabolism
- glycolysis and the krebs cycle - that generate atp by substrate - level phosphorylation .
most atp , however , be generate during a separate process call oxidative phosphorylation , which occur during cellular respiration .
cellular respiration begin when electron be transfer from nadh and fadh two -made in glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the krebs cycle - through a series of chemical reaction to a final inorganic electron acceptor ( either oxygen in aerobic respiration or non - oxygen inorganic molecule in anaerobic respiration ) .
these electron transfer take place on the inner part of the cell membrane of prokaryotic cell or in specialize protein complex in the inner membrane of the mitochondria of eukaryotic cell .
the energy of the electron be harvest to generate an electrochemical gradient across the membrane , which be use to make atp by oxidative phosphorylation .
electron transport system
the electron transport system ( ets ) be the last component involve in the process of cellular respiration  - pron - comprise a series of membrane - associate protein complex and associate mobile accessory electron carrier ( figure eight  .  one  five ) .
electron transport be a series of chemical reaction that resemble a bucket brigade in that electron from nadh and fadh two be pass rapidly from one ets electron carrier to the next .
these carrier can pass electron along in the ets because of - pron - redox potential .
for a protein or chemical to accept electron , - pron - must have a more positive redox potential than the electron donor .
therefore , electron move from electron carrier with more negative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential .
the four major class of electron carrier involve in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic electron transport system be the cytochrome , flavoprotein , iron - sulfur protein , and the quinone .
in aerobic respiration , the final electron acceptor ( i . e . , the one have the most positive redox potential ) at the end of the ets be an oxygen molecule ( o two ) that become reduce to water ( h two o ) by the final ets carrier .
this electron carrier , cytochrome oxidase , differ between bacterial type and can be use to differentiate closely related bacteria for diagnosis .
for example , the gram - negative opportunist pseudomonas aeruginosa and the gram - negative choleracause vibrio cholerae use cytochrome c oxidase , which can be detect by the oxidase test , whereas other gramnegative enterobacteriaceae , like e . coli , be negative for this test because - pron - produce different cytochrome oxidase type .
there be many circumstance under which aerobic respiration be not possible , include any one or more of the following  
the cell lack gene encode an appropriate cytochrome oxidase for transfer electron to oxygen at the end of the electron transport system .

the cell lack gene encode enzyme to minimize the severely damaging effect of dangerous oxygen radical produce during aerobic respiration , such as hydrogen peroxide ( h two o two ) or superoxide
⎛
⎝o two –⎞
⎠ .

the cell lack a sufficient amount of oxygen to carry out aerobic respiration .
one possible alternative to aerobic respiration be anaerobic respiration , use an inorganic molecule other than oxygen as a final electron acceptor .
there be many type of anaerobic respiration find in bacteria and archaea .
chapter eight 
microbial metabolism three  three  one denitrifier be important soil bacteria that use nitrate ⎛ ⎝no three –⎞⎠ and nitrite
⎛
⎝no two –⎞⎠ as final electron acceptor , produce nitrogen gas ( n two ) .
many aerobically respire bacteria , include e . coli , switch to use nitrate as a final electron acceptor and produce nitrite when oxygen level have be deplete .
microbe use anaerobic respiration commonly have an intact krebs cycle , so these organism can access the energy of the nadh and fadh two molecule form .
however , anaerobic respirer use alter ets carrier encode by - pron - genome , include distinct complex for electron transfer to - pron - final electron acceptor .
small electrochemical gradient be generate from these electron transfer system , so less atp be form through anaerobic respiration .

do both aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration use an electron transport chain ?
chemiosmosis , proton motive force , and oxidative phosphorylation
in each transfer of an electron through the ets , the electron lose energy , but with some transfer , the energy be store as potential energy by use - pron - to pump hydrogen ion ( h+ ) across a membrane .
in prokaryotic cell , h+ be pump to the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane ( call the periplasmic space in gram - negative and gram - positive bacteria ) , and in eukaryotic cell , - pron - be pump from the mitochondrial matrix across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the intermembrane space .
there be an uneven distribution of h+ across the membrane that establish an electrochemical gradient because h+ ion be positively charge ( electrical ) and there be a high concentration ( chemical ) on one side of the membrane .
this electrochemical gradient form by the accumulation of h+ ( also know as a proton ) on one side of the membrane compare with the other be refer to as the proton motive force ( pmf ) .
because the ion involve be h+ , a ph gradient be also establish , with the side of the membrane have the high concentration of h+ be more acidic .
beyond the use of the pmf to make atp , as discuss in this chapter , the pmf can also be use to drive other energetically unfavorable process , include nutrient transport and flagella rotation for motility .
the potential energy of this electrochemical gradient generate by the ets cause the h+ to diffuse across a membrane ( the plasma membrane in prokaryotic cell and the inner membrane in mitochondria in eukaryotic cell ) .
this flow of hydrogen ion across the membrane , call chemiosmosis , must occur through a channel in the membrane via a membrane - bind enzyme complex call atp synthase ( figure eight  .  one  five ) .
the tendency for movement in this way be much like water accumulate on one side of a dam , move through the dam when open .
atp synthase ( like a combination of the intake and generator of a hydroelectric dam ) be a complex protein that act as a tiny generator , turn by the force of the h+ diffuse through the enzyme , down - pron - electrochemical gradient from where there be many mutually repel h+ to where there be few h+ .
in prokaryotic cell , h+ flow from the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm , whereas in eukaryotic mitochondria , h+ flow from the intermembrane space to the mitochondrial matrix .
the turning of the part of this molecular machine regenerate atp from adp and inorganic phosphate
( pi ) by oxidative phosphorylation , a second mechanism for make atp that harvest the potential energy store within an electrochemical gradient .
three  three  two chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  one  five
the bacterial electron transport chain be a series of protein complex , electron carrier , and ion pump that be use to pump h+ out of the bacterial cytoplasm into the extracellular space .
h+ flow back down the electrochemical gradient into the bacterial cytoplasm through atp synthase , provide the energy for atp production by oxidative phosphorylation . ( credit  modification of work by klaus hoffmeier )
the number of atp molecule generate from the catabolism of glucose varie .
for example , the number of hydrogen ion that the electron transport system complex can pump through the membrane varie between different specie of organism .
in aerobic respiration in mitochondria , the passage of electron from one molecule of nadh generate enough proton motive force to make three atp molecule by oxidative phosphorylation , whereas the passage of electron from one molecule of fadh two generate enough proton motive force to make only two atp molecule .
thus , the one  zero nadh molecule make per glucose during glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the krebs cycle carry enough energy to make three  zero atp molecule , whereas the two fadh two molecule make per glucose during these process provide enough energy to make four atp molecule .
overall , the theoretical maximum yield of atp make during the complete aerobic respiration of glucose be three  eight molecule , with four be make by substrate - level phosphorylation and three  four be make by oxidative phosphorylation ( figure eight  .  one  six ) .
in reality , the total atp yield be usually less , range from one to three  four atp molecule , depend on whether the cell be use aerobic respiration or anaerobic respiration  in eukaryotic cell , some energy be expend to transport intermediate from the cytoplasm into the mitochondria , affect atp yield .
figure eight  .  one  six summarize the theoretical maximum yield of atp from various process during the complete aerobic respiration of one glucose molecule .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  three  three figure eight  .  one  six 
what be the function of the proton motive force ?
eight  .  four
fermentation learning objectives

define fermentation and explain why - pron - do not require oxygen

describe the fermentation pathway and - pron - end product and give example of microorganism that use these pathway  compare and contrast fermentation and anaerobic respiration
many cell be unable to carry out respiration because of one or more of the following circumstance  one .
the cell lack a sufficient amount of any appropriate , inorganic , final electron acceptor to carry out cellular respiration .
two .
the cell lack gene to make appropriate complex and electron carrier in the electron transport system .
three .
the cell lack gene to make one or more enzyme in the krebs cycle .
whereas lack of an appropriate inorganic final electron acceptor be environmentally dependent , the other two condition be genetically determined .
thus , many prokaryote , include member of the clinically important three  three  four chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five genus streptococcus , be permanently incapable of respiration , even in the presence of oxygen .
conversely , many prokaryote be facultative , mean that , should the environmental condition change to provide an appropriate inorganic final electron acceptor for respiration , organism contain all the gene require to do so will switch to cellular respiration for glucose metabolism because respiration allow for much great atp production per glucose molecule .
if respiration do not occur , nadh must be reoxidize to nad+ for reuse as an electron carrier for glycolysis , the cell 's only mechanism for produce any atp , to continue .
some live system use an organic molecule ( commonly pyruvate ) as a final electron acceptor through a process call fermentation .
fermentation do not involve an electron transport system and do not directly produce any additional atp beyond that produce during glycolysis by substrate - level phosphorylation .
organism carry out fermentation , call fermenter , produce a maximum of two atp molecule per glucose during glycolysis .
table eight  .  two compare the final electron acceptor and method of atp synthesis in aerobic respiration , anaerobic respiration , and fermentation .
note that the number of atp molecule show for glycolysis assume the embden - meyerhof - parnas pathway .
the number of atp molecule make by substrate - level phosphorylation ( slp ) versus oxidative phosphorylation ( op ) be indicate .
comparison of respiration versus fermentation type of metabolism example final electron acceptor pathways involve in atp synthesis
( type of phosphorylation )
maximum yield of atp molecules emp glycolysis ( slp ) krebs cycle ( slp ) electron transport and chemiosmosis ( op ) 
two  two three  four aerobic respiration
pseudomonas aeruginosa o two total three  eight emp glycolysis ( slp ) krebs cycle ( slp ) electron transport and chemiosmosis ( op ) 
two  two one – three  two anaerobic respiration paracoccus denitrifican no three − , so four − two , fe+ three ,
co two , other inorganic total five – three  six emp glycolysis ( slp )
fermentation two  zero fermentation candida albican organics ( usually pyruvate )
total two table eight  .  two microbial fermentation process have be manipulate by human and be use extensively in the production of various food and other commercial product , include pharmaceutical .
microbial fermentation can also be useful for identify microbe for diagnostic purpose .
fermentation by some bacteria , like those in yogurt and other soured food product , and by animal in muscle during oxygen depletion , be lactic acid fermentation .
the chemical reaction of lactic acid fermentation be as follow 
pyruvate + nadh ↔ lactic acid + nad+ bacteria of several gram - positive genera , include lactobacillus , leuconostoc , and streptococcus , be collectively know as the lactic acid bacteria ( lab ) , and various strain be important in food production .
during yogurt and cheese production , the highly acidic environment generate by lactic acid fermentation denature protein contain in milk , cause - pron - to solidify .
when lactic acid be the only fermentation product , the process be say to be homolactic fermentation  such be the case for lactobacillus delbrueckii and s . thermophile use in yogurt production .
however , many bacteria perform heterolactic fermentation , produce a mixture of lactic acid , ethanol and / or acetic acid , and chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  three  five co two as a result , because of - pron - use of the branched pentose phosphate pathway instead of the emp pathway for glycolysis .
one important heterolactic fermenter be leuconostoc mesenteroide , which be use for sour vegetable like cucumber and cabbage , produce pickle and sauerkraut , respectively .
lactic acid bacteria be also important medically .
the production of low ph environment within the body inhibit the establishment and growth of pathogen in these area .
for example , the vaginal microbiota be compose largely of lactic acid bacteria , but when these bacteria be reduce , yeast can proliferate , cause a yeast infection .
additionally , lactic acid bacteria be important in maintain the health of the gastrointestinal tract and , as such , be the primary component of probiotic .
another familiar fermentation process be alcohol fermentation , which produce ethanol .
the ethanol fermentation reaction be show in figure eight  .  one  seven .
in the first reaction , the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase remove a carboxyl group from pyruvate , release co two gas while produce the two - carbon molecule acetaldehyde .
the second reaction , catalyze by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase , transfer an electron from nadh to acetaldehyde , produce ethanol and nad+ .
the ethanol fermentation of pyruvate by the yeast saccharomyce cerevisiae be use in the production of alcoholic beverage and also make bread product rise due to co two production .
outside of the food industry , ethanol fermentation of plant product be important in biofuel production .
figure eight  .  one  seven
the chemical reaction of alcohol fermentation be show here .
ethanol fermentation be important in the production of alcoholic beverage and bread .
beyond lactic acid fermentation and alcohol fermentation , many other fermentation method occur in prokaryote , all for the purpose of ensure an adequate supply of nad+ for glycolysis ( table eight  .  three ) .
without these pathway , glycolysis would not occur and no atp would be harvest from the breakdown of glucose .
- pron - should be note that most form of fermentation besides homolactic fermentation produce gas , commonly co two and / or hydrogen gas .
many of these different type of fermentation pathway be also use in food production and each result in the production of different organic acid , contribute to the unique flavor of a particular ferment food product .
the propionic acid produce during propionic acid fermentation contribute to the distinctive flavor of swiss cheese , for example .
several fermentation product be important commercially outside of the food industry .
for example , chemical solvent such as acetone and butanol be produce during acetone - butanol - ethanol fermentation .
complex organic pharmaceutical compound use in antibiotic ( e . g . , penicillin ) , vaccine , and vitamin be produce through mixed acid fermentation .
fermentation product be use in the laboratory to differentiate various bacteria for diagnostic purpose .
for example , enteric bacteria be know for - pron - ability to perform mixed acid fermentation , reduce the ph , which can be detect use a ph indicator .
similarly , the bacterial production of acetoin during butanediol fermentation can also be detect .
gas production from fermentation can also be see in an invert durham tube that trap produce gas in a broth culture .
microbes can also be differentiate accord to the substrate - pron - can ferment .
for example , e . coli can ferment lactose , form gas , whereas some of - pron - close gram - negative relative can not .
the ability to ferment the sugar alcohol sorbitol be use to identify the pathogenic enterohemorrhagic o one  five  seven  h seven strain of e . coli because , unlike other e . coli strain , - pron - be unable to ferment sorbitol .
last , mannitol fermentation differentiate the mannitol - ferment staphylococcus aureus from other non – mannitol - fermenting staphylococci .
three  three  six chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five common fermentation pathways pathway end products example microbes commercial products acetonebutanolethanol acetone , butanol , ethanol , co two clostridium acetobutylicum commercial solvent , gasoline alternative alcohol ethanol , co two candida , saccharomyces beer , bread butanediol formic and lactic acid  ethanol  acetoin  two  ,  three butanediol  co two  hydrogen gas klebsiella , enterobacter chardonnay wine butyric acid butyric acid , co two , hydrogen gas clostridium butyricum butter lactic acid lactic acid streptococcus , lactobacillus sauerkraut , yogurt , cheese mixed acid acetic , formic , lactic , and succinic acid  ethanol , co two , hydrogen gas escherichia , shigella vinegar , cosmetic , pharmaceutical propionic acid acetic acid , propionic acid , co two propionibacterium , bifidobacterium swiss cheese table eight  .  three

when would a metabolically versatile microbe perform fermentation rather than cellular respiration ?
identify bacteria by use api test panels identification of a microbial isolate be essential for the proper diagnosis and appropriate treatment of patient .
scientist have develop technique that identify bacteria accord to - pron - biochemical characteristic .
typically , - pron - either examine the use of specific carbon source as substrate for fermentation or other metabolic reaction , or - pron - identify fermentation product or specific enzyme present in reaction .
in the past , microbiologist have use individual test tube and plate to conduct biochemical testing .
however , scientist , especially those in clinical laboratory , now more frequently use plastic , disposable , multitest panel that contain a number of miniature reaction tube , each typically include a specific substrate and ph indicator .
after inoculation of the test panel with a small sample of the microbe in question and incubation , scientist can compare the result to a database that include the expect result for specific biochemical reaction for known microbe , thus enable rapid identification of a sample microbe .
these test panel have allow scientist to reduce cost while improve efficiency and reproducibility by perform a large number of test simultaneously .
many commercial , miniaturize biochemical test panel cover a number of clinically important group of bacteria and yeast .
one of the early and most popular test panel be the analytical profile index ( api ) panel invent in the one  nine  seven  zero .
once some basic laboratory characterization of a give strain have be perform , such as determine the strain 's gram morphology , an appropriate test strip that contain one  zero to two  zero different biochemical test for differentiate strain within that microbial group can be use .
currently , the various api micro connections chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  three  seven strip can be use to quickly and easily identify more than six  zero  zero specie of bacteria , both aerobic and anaerobic , and approximately one  zero  zero different type of yeast .
base on the color of the reaction when metabolic end product be present , due to the presence of ph indicator , a metabolic profile be create from the result ( figure eight  .  one  eight ) .
microbiologist can then compare the sample 's profile to the database to identify the specific microbe .
figure eight  .  one  eight
the api two  zero ne test strip be use to identify specific strain of gram - negative bacteria outside the enterobacteriaceae .
here be an api two  zero ne test strip result for photobacterium damselae ssp .
piscicida .
part two
many of hannah 's symptom be consistent with several different infection , include influenza and pneumonia .
however , - pron - sluggish reflexe along with - pron - light sensitivity and stiff neck suggest some possible involvement of the central nervous system , perhaps indicate meningitis .
meningitis be an infection of the cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) around the brain and spinal cord that cause inflammation of the meninge , the protective layer cover the brain .
meningitis can be cause by virus , bacteria , or fungi .
although all form of meningitis be serious , bacterial meningitis be particularly serious .
bacterial meningitis may be cause by several different bacteria , but the bacterium neisseria meningitidis , a gram - negative , bean - shaped diplococcus , be a common cause and lead to death within one to two day in five % to one  zero % of patient .
give the potential seriousness of hannah 's condition , - pron - physician advise - pron - parent to take - pron - to the hospital in the gambian capital of banjul and there have - pron - test and treat for possible meningitis .
after a three  - hour drive to the hospital , hannah be immediately admit .
physician take a blood sample and perform a lumbar puncture to test - pron - csf .
- pron - also immediately start - pron - on a course of the antibiotic ceftriaxone , the drug of choice for treatment of meningitis cause by n . meningitidis , without wait for laboratory test result .
 how may biochemical testing be use to confirm the identity of n . meningitidis ?

why do hannah 's doctor decide to administer antibiotic without wait for the test result ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
eight  .  five catabolism of lipids and proteins learning objectives

describe how lipid be catabolize
 describe how lipid catabolism can be use to identify microbe
 describe how protein be catabolize

describe how protein catabolism can be use to identify bacteria previous section have discuss the catabolism of glucose , which provide energy to living cell , as well as how clinical focus three  three  eight chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five polysaccharide like glycogen , starch , and cellulose be degrade to glucose monomer .
but microbe consume more than just carbohydrate for food .
in fact , the microbial world be know for - pron - ability to degrade a wide range of molecule , both naturally occur and those make by human process , for use as carbon source .
in this section , - pron - will see that the pathway for both lipid and protein catabolism connect to those use for carbohydrate catabolism , eventually lead into glycolysis , the transition reaction , and the krebs cycle pathway .
metabolic pathway should be consider to be porous - that is , substance enter from other pathway , and intermediate leave for other pathway .
these pathway be not close system .
many of the substrate , intermediate , and product in a particular pathway be reactant in other pathway .
lipid catabolism triglycerides be a form of long - term energy storage in animal .
- pron - be make of glycerol and three fatty acid ( see figure seven  .  one  two ) .
phospholipid compose the cell and organelle membrane of all organism except the archaea .
phospholipid structure be similar to triglyceride except that one of the fatty acid be replace by a phosphorylate head group ( see figure seven  .  one  three ) .
triglyceride and phospholipid be break down first by release fatty acid chain ( and / or the phosphorylate head group , in the case of phospholipid ) from the three - carbon glycerol backbone .
the reaction break down triglyceride be catalyze by lipase and those involve phospholipid be catalyze by phospholipase .
these enzyme contribute to the virulence of certain microbe , such as the bacterium staphylococcus aureus and the fungus cryptococcus neoforman .
these microbe use phospholipase to destroy lipid and phospholipid in host cell and then use the catabolic product for energy ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) .
the result product of lipid catabolism , glycerol and fatty acid , can be further degrade .
glycerol can be phosphorylate to glycerol -  three  - phosphate and easily convert to glyceraldehyde three  - phosphate , which continue through glycolysis .
the release fatty acid be catabolize in a process call β - oxidation , which sequentially remove two - carbon acetyl group from the end of fatty acid chain , reduce nad+ and fad to produce nadh and fadh two , respectively , whose electron can be use to make atp by oxidative phosphorylation .
the acetyl group produce during β - oxidation be carry by coenzyme a to the krebs cycle , and - pron - movement through this cycle result in - pron - degradation to co two , produce atp by substrate - level phosphorylation and additional nadh and fadh two molecule ( see appendix c for a detailed illustration of β - oxidation ) .
other type of lipid can also be degrade by certain microbe .
for example , the ability of certain pathogen , like mycobacterium tuberculosis , to degrade cholesterol contribute to - pron - virulence .
the side chain of cholesterol can be easily remove enzymatically , but degradation of the remain fused ring be more problematic .
the four fuse ring be sequentially break in a multistep process facilitate by specific enzyme , and the result product , include pyruvate , can be further catabolize in the krebs cycle .

how can lipase and phospholipase contribute to virulence in microbe ?
protein catabolism proteins be degrade through the concerted action of a variety of microbial protease enzyme .
extracellular protease cut protein internally at specific amino acid sequence , break - pron - down into small peptide that can then be take up by cell .
some clinically important pathogen can be identify by - pron - ability to produce a specific type of extracellular protease .
for example , the production of the extracellular protease gelatinase by member of the genera proteus and serratia can be use to distinguish - pron - from other gram - negative enteric bacteria .
follow inoculation and growth of microbe in gelatin broth , degradation of the gelatin protein due to gelatinase production prevent solidification of gelatin when refrigerate .
other pathogen can be distinguish by - pron - ability to degrade casein , the main protein find in milk .
when grow on skim milk agar , production of the extracellular protease chapter eight
 microbial metabolism three  three  nine caseinase cause degradation of casein , which appear as a zone of clear around the microbial growth .
caseinase production by the opportunist pathogen pseudomonas aeruginosa can be use to distinguish - pron - from other related gram - negative bacteria .
after extracellular protease degradation and uptake of peptide in the cell , the peptide can then be break down further into individual amino acid by additional intracellular protease , and each amino acid can be enzymatically deaminate to remove the amino group .
the remain molecule can then enter the transition reaction or the krebs cycle .

how can protein catabolism help identify microbe ?
part three
because bacterial meningitis progress so rapidly , hannah 's doctor have decide to treat - pron - aggressively with antibiotic , base on empirical observation of - pron - symptom .
however , laboratory testing to confirm the cause of hannah 's meningitis be still important for several reason .
n . meningitidis be an infectious pathogen that can be spread from person to person through close contact  therefore , if test confirm n . meningitidis as the cause of hannah 's symptom , hannah 's parent and other who come into close contact with - pron - may need to be vaccinate or receive prophylactic antibiotic to lower - pron - risk of contract the disease .
on the other hand , if - pron - turn out that n . meningitidis be not the cause , hannah 's doctor may need to change - pron - treatment .
the clinical laboratory perform a gram stain on hannah 's blood and csf sample .
the gram stain show the presence of a bean - shape gram - negative diplococcus .
the technician in the hospital lab culture hannah 's blood sample on both blood agar and chocolate agar , and the bacterium that grow on both medium form gray , nonhemolytic colony .
next , - pron - perform an oxidase test on this bacterium and determine that - pron - be oxidase positive .
last , - pron - examine the repertoire of sugar that the bacterium could use as a carbon source and find that the bacterium be positive for glucose and maltose use but negative for lactose and sucrose use .
all of these test result be consistent with characteristic of n . meningitidis .

what do these test result tell - pron - about the metabolic pathway of n . meningitidis ?

why do - pron - think that the hospital use these biochemical test for identification in lieu of molecular analysis by dna testing ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
eight  .  six
photosynthesis learning objectives
 describe the function and location of photosynthetic pigment in eukaryote and prokaryote  describe the major product of the light - dependent and light - independent reaction
 describe the reaction that produce glucose in a photosynthetic cell  compare and contrast cyclic and noncyclic photophosphorylation
heterotrophic organism range from e . coli to human rely on the chemical energy find mainly in carbohydrate clinical focus three  four  zero chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five molecule .
many of these carbohydrate be produce by photosynthesis , the biochemical process by which phototrophic organism convert solar energy ( sunlight ) into chemical energy .
although photosynthesis be most commonly associate with plant , microbial photosynthesis be also a significant supplier of chemical energy , fuel many diverse ecosystem .
in this section , - pron - will focus on microbial photosynthesis .
photosynthesis take place in two sequential stage  the light - dependent reaction and the light - independent reaction ( figure eight  .  one  nine ) .
in the light - dependent reaction , energy from sunlight be absorb by pigment molecule in photosynthetic membrane and convert into stored chemical energy .
in the light - independent reaction , the chemical energy produce by the light - dependent reaction be use to drive the assembly of sugar molecule use co two  however , these reaction be still light dependent because the product of the light - dependent reaction necessary for drive - pron - be short - lived .
the light - dependent reaction produce atp and either nadph or nadh to temporarily store energy .
these energy carrier be use in the light - independent reaction to drive the energetically unfavorable process of " fix " inorganic co two in an organic form , sugar .
figure eight  .  one  nine
the light - dependent reaction of photosynthesis ( leave ) convert light energy into chemical energy , form atp and nadph .
these product be use by the light - independent reaction to fix co two , produce organic carbon molecule .
photosynthetic structures in eukaryotes and prokaryotes
in all phototrophic eukaryote , photosynthesis take place inside a chloroplast , an organelle that arise in eukaryote by endosymbiosis of a photosynthetic bacterium ( see unique characteristics of eukaryotic cells ) .
these chloroplast be enclose by a double membrane with inner and outer layer .
within the chloroplast be a third membrane that form stack , disc - shape photosynthetic structure call thylakoid ( figure eight  .  two  zero ) .
a stack of thylakoids be call a granum , and the space surround the granum within the chloroplast be call stroma .
photosynthetic membrane in prokaryote , by contrast , be not organize into distinct membrane - enclose organelle  rather , - pron - be infolded region of the plasma membrane .
in cyanobacteria , for example , these infolded region be also refer to as thylakoid .
in either case , embed within the thylakoid membrane or other photosynthetic bacterial membrane be photosynthetic pigment molecule organize into one or more photosystem , where light energy be actually convert into chemical energy .
photosynthetic pigment within the photosynthetic membrane be organize into photosystem , each of which be compose of a light - harvesting ( antennae ) complex and a reaction center .
the light - harvesting complex consist of chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  four  one multiple protein and associate pigment that each may absorb light energy and , thus , become excited .
this energy be transfer from one pigment molecule to another until eventually ( after about a millionth of a second ) - pron - be deliver to the reaction center .
up to this point , only energy - not electron - have be transfer between molecule .
the reaction center contain a pigment molecule that can undergo oxidation upon excitation , actually give up an electron .
- pron - be at this step in photosynthesis that light energy be convert into an excited electron .
different kind of light - harvest pigment absorb unique pattern of wavelength ( color ) of visible light .
pigment reflect or transmit the wavelength - pron - can not absorb , make - pron - appear the corresponding color .
example of photosynthetic pigment ( molecule use to absorb solar energy ) be bacteriochlorophyll ( green , purple , or red ) , carotenoid ( orange , red , or yellow ) , chlorophyll ( green ) , phycocyanin ( blue ) , and phycoerythrin ( red ) .
by have mixture of pigment , an organism can absorb energy from more wavelength .
because photosynthetic bacteria commonly grow in competition for sunlight , each type of photosynthetic bacteria be optimize for harvest the wavelength of light to which - pron - be commonly expose , lead to stratification of microbial community in aquatic and soil ecosystem by light quality and penetration .
once the light harvest complex transfer the energy to the reaction center , the reaction center deliver - pron - high - energy electron , one by one , to an electron carrier in an electron transport system , and electron transfer through the ets be initiate .
the ets be similar to that use in cellular respiration and be embed within the photosynthetic membrane .
ultimately , the electron be use to produce nadh or nadph .
the electrochemical gradient that form across the photosynthetic membrane be use to generate atp by chemiosmosis through the process of photophosphorylation , another example of oxidative phosphorylation ( figure eight  .  two  one ) .
figure eight  .  two  zero ( a ) photosynthesis in eukaryote take place in chloroplast , which contain thylakoid stack into grana .
( b )
a photosynthetic prokaryote have infolded region of the plasma membrane that function like thylakoid .
( credit  scale bar datum from matt russell . )
three  four  two chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  two  one
this figure summarize how a photosystem work .
light harvesting ( lh ) pigment absorb light energy , convert - pron - to chemical energy .
the energy be pass from one lh pigment to another until - pron - reach a reaction center ( rc ) pigment , excite an electron .
this high - energy electron be lose from the rc pigment and pass through an electron transport system ( ets ) , ultimately produce nadh or nadph and atp .
a reduce molecule ( h two a ) donate an electron , replace electron to the electron - deficient rc pigment .

in a phototrophic eukaryote , where do photosynthesis take place ?
oxygenic and anoxygenic photosynthesis
for photosynthesis to continue , the electron lose from the reaction center pigment must be replace .
the source of this electron ( h two a ) differentiate the oxygenic photosynthesis of plant and cyanobacteria from anoxygenic photosynthesis carry out by other type of bacterial phototroph ( figure eight  .  two  two ) .
in oxygenic photosynthesis , h two o be split and supply the electron to the reaction center .
because oxygen be generate as a byproduct and be release , this type of photosynthesis be refer to as oxygenic photosynthesis .
however , when other reduce compound serve as the electron donor , oxygen be not generate  these type of photosynthesis be call anoxygenic photosynthesis .
hydrogen sulfide ( h two s ) or thiosulfate ⎛⎝ s two o three two −⎞⎠ can serve as the electron donor , generate elemental sulfur and sulfate ⎛⎝ so four two −⎞⎠ ion , respectively , as a result .
photosystem have be classify into two type 
photosystem i ( psi ) and photosystem ii ( psii )
( figure eight  .  two  three ) .
cyanobacteria and plant chloroplast have both photosystem , whereas anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria use only one of the photosystem .
both photosystem be excite by light energy simultaneously .
if the cell require both atp and nadph for biosynthesis , then - pron - will carry out noncyclic photophosphorylation .
upon pass of the psii reaction center electron to the ets that connect psii and psi , the lose electron from the psii reaction center be replace by the splitting of water .
the excited psi reaction center electron be use to reduce nadp+ to nadph and be replace by the electron exit the ets .
the flow of electron in this way be call the z - scheme .
if a cell 's need for atp be significantly great than - pron - need for nadph , - pron - may bypass the production of reduce power through cyclic photophosphorylation .
only psi be use during cyclic photophosphorylation  the high - energy electron of the psi reaction center be pass to an ets carrier and then ultimately return to the oxidized psi reaction center pigment , thereby reduce - pron - .
chapter eight
 microbial metabolism three  four  three figure eight  .  two  two eukaryotes and cyanobacteria carry out oxygenic photosynthesis , produce oxygen , whereas other bacteria carry out anoxygenic photosynthesis , which do not produce oxygen .
three  four  four chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure eight  .  two  three ( a
) psi and psii be find on the thylakoid membrane .
the high - energy electron from psii be pass to an ets , which generate a proton motive force for atp synthesis by chemiosmosis , and ultimately replace the electron lose by the psi reaction center .
the psi reaction center electron be use to make nadph .
( b )
when both atp and nadph be require , noncyclic photophosphorylation ( in cyanobacteria and plant ) provide both .
the electron flow describe here be refer to as the z - scheme ( show in yellow in [ a ] ) .
when the cell 's atp need outweigh those for nadph , cyanobacteria and plant will use only psi , and - pron - reaction center electron be pass to the ets to generate a proton motive force use for atp synthesis .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  four  five

why would a photosynthetic bacterium have different pigment ?
light - independent reactions
after the energy from the sun be convert into chemical energy and temporarily store in atp and nadph molecule ( have lifespan of millionth of a second ) , photoautotroph have the fuel need to build multicarbon carbohydrate molecule , which can survive for hundred of million of year , for long - term energy storage .
the carbon come from co two , the gas that be a waste product of cellular respiration .
the calvin - benson cycle ( name for melvin calvin [ one  nine  one  one – one  nine  nine  seven ] and andrew benson [ one  nine  one  seven – two  zero  one  five ] ) , the biochemical pathway use for fixation of co two , be locate within the cytoplasm of photosynthetic bacteria and in the stroma of eukaryotic chloroplast .
the light - independent reaction of the calvin cycle can be organize into three basic stage  fixation , reduction , and regeneration ( see appendix c for a detailed illustration of the calvin cycle ) .

fixation 
the enzyme ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase ( rubisco ) catalyze the addition of a co two to ribulose bisphosphate ( rubp ) .
this result in the production of three  - phosphoglycerate ( three  - pga ) .
 reduction  six molecule of both atp and nadph ( from the light - dependent reaction ) be use to convert three  - pga into glyceraldehyde three  - phosphate ( g three p ) .
some g three p be then use to build glucose .

regeneration  the remain g three p not use to synthesize glucose be use to regenerate rubp , enable the system to continue co two fixation .
three more molecule of atp be use in these regeneration reaction .
the calvin cycle be use extensively by plant and photoautotrophic bacteria , and the enzyme rubisco be say to be the most plentiful enzyme on earth , compose three  zero %– five  zero % of the total soluble protein in plant chloroplasts . [ one ]
however , besides - pron - prevalent use in photoautotroph , the calvin cycle be also use by many nonphotosynthetic chemoautotroph to fix co two .
additionally , other bacteria and archaea use alternative system for co two fixation .
although most bacteria use calvin cycle alternative be chemoautotrophic , certain green sulfur photoautotrophic bacteria have be also show to use an alternative co two fixation pathway .

describe the three stage of the calvin cycle .
eight  .  seven
biogeochemical cycles learning objectives
 define and describe the importance of microorganism in the biogeochemical cycle of carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur  define and give an example of bioremediation energy flow directionally through ecosystem , enter as sunlight for phototroph or as inorganic molecule for chemoautotroph .
the six most common element associate with organic molecule - carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , oxygen , phosphorus , and sulfur - take a variety of chemical form and may exist for long period in the atmosphere , one . a . dhingra et al .
“
enhanced translation of a chloroplast - expressed rbcs gene restore small subunit levels and photosynthesis in nuclear rbcs antisense plants .
”
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america one  zero  one
no .
one  six ( two  zero  zero  four  )  six  three  one  five – six  three  two  zero .
three  four  six chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five on land , in water , or beneath earth 's surface .
geologic process , such as erosion , water drainage , the movement of the continental plate , and weather , all be involve in the cycling of element on earth .
because geology and chemistry have major role in the study of this process , the recycling of inorganic matter between live organism and - pron - nonlive environment be call a biogeochemical cycle .
here , - pron - will focus on the function of microorganism in these cycle , which play role at each step , most frequently interconverte oxidized version of molecule with reduce one .
carbon cycle carbon be one of the most important element to live organism , as show by - pron - abundance and presence in all organic molecule .
the carbon cycle exemplify the connection between organism in various ecosystem .
carbon be exchange between heterotroph and autotroph within and between ecosystem primarily by way of atmospheric co two , a fully oxidize version of carbon that serve as the basic building block that autotroph use to build multicarbon , high - energy organic molecule such as glucose .
photoautotroph and chemoautotroph harness energy from the sun and from inorganic chemical compound , respectively , to covalently bond carbon atom together into reduce organic compound whose energy can be later access through the process of respiration and fermentation ( figure eight  .  two  four ) .
overall , there be a constant exchange of co two between the heterotroph ( which produce co two as a result of respiration or fermentation ) and the autotroph ( which use the co two for fixation ) .
autotroph also respire or ferment , consume the organic molecule - pron - form  - pron - do not fix carbon for heterotroph , but rather use - pron - for - pron - own metabolic need .
bacteria and archaea that use methane as - pron - carbon source be call methanotroph .
reduce one - carbon compound like methane accumulate in certain anaerobic environment when co two be use as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration by archaea call methanogen .
some methanogen also ferment acetate ( two carbon ) to produce methane and co two .
methane accumulation due to methanogenesis occur in both natural anaerobic soil and aquatic environment  methane accumulation also occur as a result of animal husbandry because methanogen be member of the normal microbiota of ruminant .
environmental methane accumulation due to methanogenesis be of consequence because - pron - be a strong greenhouse gas , and methanotroph help to reduce atmospheric methane level .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  four  seven figure eight  .  two  four
this figure summarize the carbon cycle .
eukaryote participate in aerobic respiration , fermentation , and oxygenic photosynthesis .
prokaryote participate in all the step show .
( credit  modification of work by noaa )

describe the interaction between heterotroph and autotroph in the carbon cycle .
nitrogen cycle
many biological macromolecule , include protein and nucleic acid , contain nitrogen  however , get nitrogen into live organism be difficult .
prokaryote play essential role in the nitrogen cycle ( figure eight  .  two  five ) , transform nitrogen between various form for - pron - own need , benefit other organism indirectly .
plant and phytoplankton can not incorporate nitrogen from the atmosphere ( where - pron - exist as tightly bond , triple covalent n two ) , even though this molecule compose approximately seven  eight % of the atmosphere .
nitrogen enter the live world through freeliving and symbiotic bacteria , which incorporate nitrogen into - pron - macromolecule through specialized biochemical pathway call nitrogen fixation .
cyanobacteria in aquatic ecosystem fix inorganic nitrogen ( from nitrogen gas ) into ammonia ( nh three ) that can be easily incorporate into biological macromolecule .
rhizobium bacteria ( figure eight  .  one ) also fix nitrogen and live symbiotically in the root nodule of legume ( such as bean , peanut , and pea ) , provide - pron - with need organic nitrogen while receive fix carbon as sugar in exchange .
free - living bacteria , such as member of the genus azotobacter , be also able to fix nitrogen .
the nitrogen that enter living system by nitrogen fixation be eventually convert from organic nitrogen back into nitrogen gas by microbe through three step  ammonification , nitrification , and denitrification .
in terrestrial system , three  four  eight chapter eight  microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the first step be the ammonification process , in which certain bacteria and fungi convert nitrogenous waste from living animal or from the remain of dead organism into ammonia ( nh three ) .
this ammonia be then oxidize to nitrite ⎛ ⎝ no two − ⎞ ⎠ , then to nitrate ⎛ ⎝ no three − ⎞ ⎠ , by nitrify soil bacteria such as member of the genus nitrosomonas , through the process of nitrification .
last , the process of denitrification occur , whereby soil bacteria , such as member of the genera pseudomonas and clostridium , use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration , convert - pron - into nitrogen gas that reenter the atmosphere .
a similar process occur in the marine nitrogen cycle , where these three process be perform by marine bacteria and archaea .
human activity release nitrogen into the environment by the use of artificial fertilizer that contain nitrogen and phosphorus compound , which be then wash into lake , river , and stream by surface runoff .
a major effect from fertilizer runoff be saltwater and freshwater eutrophication , in which nutrient runoff cause the overgrowth and subsequent death of aquatic algae , make water source anaerobic and inhospitable for the survival of aquatic organism .
figure eight  .  two  five
this figure summarize the nitrogen cycle .
note that specific group of prokaryote each participate in every step in the cycle .
( credit  modification of work by noaa )

what be the three step of the nitrogen cycle ?
chapter eight
 microbial metabolism
three  four  nine
to learn more about the nitrogen cycle , visit the pbs ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two nitrogencycle ) website .
sulfur cycle sulfur be an essential element for the macromolecule of live organism .
as part of the amino acid cysteine and methionine , - pron - be involve in the formation of protein .
- pron - be also find in several vitamin necessary for the synthesis of important biological molecule like coenzyme a . several group of microbe be responsible for carry out process involve in the sulfur cycle ( figure eight  .  two  six ) .
anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria as well as chemoautotrophic archaea and bacteria use hydrogen sulfide as an electron donor , oxidize - pron - first to elemental sulfur ( s zero ) , then to sulfate ⎛⎝ so four two −⎞⎠ .
this lead to stratification of hydrogen sulfide in soil , with level increase at deep , more anaerobic depth .
many bacteria and plant can use sulfate as a sulfur source .
decomposition dead organism by fungus and bacteria remove sulfur group from amino acid , produce hydrogen sulfide , return inorganic sulfur to the environment .
figure eight  .  two  six
this figure summarize the sulfur cycle .
note that specific group of prokaryote each may participate in every step in the cycle .
( credit  modification of work by noaa )
link to learn three  five  zero chapter eight

microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
which group of microbe carry out the sulfur cycle ?
other biogeochemical cycles
beyond - pron - involvement in the carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur cycle , prokaryote be involve in other biogeochemical cycle as well .
like the carbon , nitrogen , and sulfur cycle , several of these additional biogeochemical cycle , such as the iron ( fe ) , manganese ( mn ) , and chromium ( cr ) cycle , also involve redox chemistry , with prokaryote play role in both oxidation and reduction .
several other element undergo chemical cycle that do not involve redox chemistry .
example of these be phosphorus ( p ) , calcium ( ca ) , and silica ( si ) cycle .
the cycling of these element be particularly important in ocean because large quantity of these element be incorporate into the exoskeleton of marine organism .
these biogeochemical cycle do not involve redox chemistry but instead involve fluctuation in the solubility of compound contain calcium , phosphorous , and silica .
the overgrowth of naturally occur microbial community be typically limit by the availability of nitrogen ( as previously mention ) , phosphorus , and iron .
human activity introduce excessive amount of iron , nitrogen , or phosphorus ( typically from detergent ) may lead to eutrophication .
bioremediation microbial bioremediation leverage microbial metabolism to remove xenobiotic or other pollutant .
xenobiotic be compound synthesize by human and introduce into the environment in much high concentration than would naturally occur .
such environmental contamination may involve adhesive , dye , flame retardant , lubricant , oil and petroleum product , organic solvent , pesticide , and product of the combustion of gasoline and oil .
many xenobiotic resist breakdown , and some accumulate in the food chain after be consume or absorb by fish and wildlife , which , in turn , may be eat by human .
of particular concern be contaminant like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( pah ) , a carcinogenic xenobiotic find in crude oil , and trichloroethylene ( tce ) , a common groundwater contaminant .
bioremediation process can be categorize as in situ or ex situ .
bioremediation conduct at the site of contamination be call in situ bioremediation and do not involve movement of contaminated material .
in contrast , ex situ bioremediation involve the removal of contaminate material from the original site so that - pron - can be treat elsewhere , typically in a large , line pit where condition be optimize for degradation of the contaminant .
some bioremediation process rely on microorganism that be indigenous to the contaminate site or material .
enhance bioremediation technique , which may be apply to either in situ or ex situ processing , involve the addition of nutrient and / or air to encourage the growth of pollution - degrade microbe  - pron - may also involve the addition of non - native microbe know for - pron - ability to degrade contaminant .
for example , certain bacteria of the genera rhodococcus and pseudomonas be know for - pron - ability to degrade many environmental contaminant , include aromatic compound like those find in oil , down to co two .
the gene encode - pron - degradatory enzyme be commonly find on plasmid .
other , like alcanivorax borkumensis , produce surfactant that be useful in the solubilization of the hydrophobic molecule find in oil , make - pron - more accessible to other microbe for degradation .

compare and contrast the benefit of in situ and ex situ bioremediation .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism
three  five  one resolution
although there be a dna test specific for neisseria meningitidis , - pron - be not practical for use in some develop country because - pron - require expensive equipment and a high level of expertise to perform .
the hospital in banjul be not equip to perform dna testing .
biochemical testing , however , be much less expensive and be still effective for microbial identification .
fortunately for hannah , - pron - symptom begin to resolve with antibiotic therapy .
patient who survive bacterial meningitis often suffer from long - term complication such as brain damage , hear loss , and seizure , but after several week of recovery , hannah do not seem to be exhibit any long - term effect and - pron - behavior return to normal .
because of - pron - age , - pron - parent be advise to monitor - pron - closely for any sign of developmental issue and have - pron - regularly evaluate by - pron - pediatrician .
n . meningitidis be find in the normal respiratory microbiota in one  zero %– two  zero % of the human population . [ two ]
in most case , - pron - do not cause disease , but for reason not fully understand , the bacterium can sometimes invade the bloodstream and cause infection in other area of the body , include the brain .
the disease be more common in infant and child , like hannah .
the prevalence of meningitis cause by n . meningitidis be particularly high in the so - call meningitis belt , a region of sub - saharan african that include two  six country stretch from senegal to ethiopia
( figure eight  .  two  seven ) .
the reason for this high prevalence be not clear , but several factor may contribute to high rate of transmission , such as the dry , dusty climate  overcrowding and low standard of living  and the relatively low immunocompetence and nutritional status of the population . [ three ]
a vaccine against four bacterial strain of n . meningitidis be available .
vaccination be recommend for one  one  - and one  two  - year - old child , with a booster at age one  six year .
vaccination be also recommend for young people who live in close quarter with other ( e . g . , college dormitory , military barrack ) , where the disease be more easily transmit .
traveler visit the " meningitis belt " should also be vaccinate , especially during the dry season ( december through june ) when the prevalence be highest . [ four ][ five ]
figure eight  .  two  seven ( a ) neisseria meningitidis be a gram - negative diplococcus , as show in this gram - stain sample .
( b )
the “ meningitis belt " be the area of sub - saharan africa with high prevalence of meningitis cause by n . meningitidis .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
meningococcal disease  causes and transmission .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / meningococcal / three  five  two chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five summary eight  .  one energy , matter , and enzymes 
metabolism include chemical reaction that break down complex molecule ( catabolism ) and those that build complex molecule ( anabolism ) .

organisms may be classify accord to - pron - source of carbon .
autotroph convert inorganic carbon dioxide into organic carbon  heterotroph use fix organic carbon compound .
 organisms may also be classify accord to - pron - energy source .
phototroph obtain - pron - energy from light .
chemotroph get - pron - energy from chemical compound .
organotroph use organic molecule , and lithotroph use inorganic chemical .

cellular electron carrier accept high - energy electron from food and later serve as electron donor in subsequent redox reaction .
fad / fadh two , nad+ / nadh , and nadp+ / nadph be important electron carrier .

adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) serve as the energy currency of the cell , safely store chemical energy in - pron - two high - energy phosphate bond for late use to drive process require energy .

enzymes be biological catalyst that increase the rate of chemical reaction inside cell by lower the activation energy require for the reaction to proceed .

in nature , exergonic reaction do not require energy beyond activation energy to proceed , and - pron - release energy .
- pron - may proceed without enzyme , but at a slow rate .
conversely , endergonic reaction require energy beyond activation energy to occur .
in cell , endergonic reaction be couple to exergonic reaction , make the combination energetically favorable .

substrates bind to the enzyme 's active site .
this process typically alter the structure of both the active site and the substrate , favor transition - state formation  this be know as induce fit .

cofactor be inorganic ion that stabilize enzyme conformation and function .
coenzyme be organic molecule require for proper enzyme function and be often derive from vitamin .
an enzyme lack a cofactor or coenzyme be an apoenzyme  an enzyme with a bind cofactor or coenzyme be a holoenzyme .

competitive inhibitor regulate enzyme by bind to an enzyme 's active site , prevent substrate binding .
noncompetitive ( allosteric ) inhibitor bind to allosteric site , induce a conformational change in the enzyme that prevent - pron - from function .
feedback inhibition occur when the product of a metabolic pathway noncompetitively bind to an enzyme early on in the pathway , ultimately prevent the synthesis of the product .
eight  .  two catabolism of carbohydrates

glycolysis be the first step in the breakdown of glucose , result in the formation of atp , which be produce by substrate - level phosphorylation  nadh  and two pyruvate molecule .
glycolysis do not use oxygen and be not oxygen dependent .

after glycolysis , a three - carbon pyruvate be decarboxylate to form a two - carbon acetyl group , couple with the formation of nadh .
the acetyl group be attach to a large carrier compound call coenzyme a . 
after the transition step , coenzyme a transport the two - carbon acetyl to the krebs cycle , where the two carbon enter the cycle .
per turn of the cycle , one acetyl group derive from glycolysis be further oxidize , produce three nadh molecule , one fadh two , and one atp by substrate - level phosphorylation , and release two co two molecule .

the krebs cycle may be use for other purpose .
many of the intermediate be use to synthesize important about / causes - transmission . html .
accessed september one  two , two  zero  one  six .
three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
meningococcal disease in other countries .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / meningococcal / global . html .
accessed september one  two , two  zero  one  six .
four .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ health information for travelers to the gambia  traveler view .
"
http / / wwwnc . cdc . gov / travel / destination / traveler / none / the - gambia .
accessed september one  two , two  zero  one  six .
five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
meningococcal
 who need to be vaccinate ?
”
http / / www . cdc . gov / vaccines / vpd - vac / mene / who - vaccinate . htm .
accessed september one  two , two  zero  one  six .
chapter eight  microbial metabolism three  five  three cellular molecule , include amino acid , chlorophyll , fatty acid , and nucleotide .
eight  .  three
cellular respiration

most atp generate during the cellular respiration of glucose be make by oxidative phosphorylation .

an electron transport system ( ets ) be compose of a series of membrane - associate protein complex and associate mobile accessory electron carrier .
the ets be embed in the cytoplasmic membrane of prokaryote and the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryote .

each ets complex have a different redox potential , and electron move from electron carrier with more negative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential .

to carry out aerobic respiration , a cell require oxygen as the final electron acceptor .
a cell also need a complete krebs cycle , an appropriate cytochrome oxidase , and oxygen detoxification enzyme to prevent the harmful effect of oxygen radical produce during aerobic respiration .

organisms perform anaerobic respiration use alternative electron transport system carrier for the ultimate transfer of electron to the final non - oxygen electron acceptor .

microbes show great variation in the composition of - pron - electron transport system , which can be use for diagnostic purpose to help identify certain pathogen .

as electron be pass from nadh and fadh two through an ets , the electron lose energy .
this energy be store through the pumping of h+ across the membrane , generate a proton motive force .

the energy of this proton motive force can be harness by allow hydrogen ion to diffuse back through the membrane by chemiosmosis use atp synthase .
as hydrogen ion diffuse through down - pron - electrochemical gradient , component of atp synthase spin , make atp from adp and pi by oxidative phosphorylation .

aerobic respiration form more atp ( a maximum of three  four atp molecule ) during oxidative phosphorylation than do anaerobic respiration ( between one and three  two atp molecule ) .
eight  .  four fermentation  fermentation use an organic molecule as a final electron acceptor to regenerate nad+ from nadh so that glycolysis can continue .

fermentation do not involve an electron transport system , and no atp be make by the fermentation process directly .
fermenter make very little atp - only two atp molecule per glucose molecule during glycolysis .
 microbial fermentation process have be use for the production of food and pharmaceutical , and for the identification of microbe .

during lactic acid fermentation , pyruvate accepts electron from nadh and be reduce to lactic acid .
microbe perform homolactic fermentation produce only lactic acid as the fermentation product  microbe perform heterolactic fermentation produce a mixture of lactic acid , ethanol and / or acetic acid , and co two .

lactic acid production by the normal microbiota prevent growth of pathogen in certain body region and be important for the health of the gastrointestinal tract .

during ethanol fermentation , pyruvate be first decarboxylated ( release co two ) to acetaldehyde , which then accept electron from nadh , reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol .
ethanol fermentation be use for the production of alcoholic beverage , for make bread product rise , and for biofuel production .
 fermentation product of pathway ( e . g . , propionic acid fermentation ) provide distinctive flavor to food product .
fermentation be use to produce chemical solvent ( acetone - butanol - ethanol fermentation ) and pharmaceutical ( mixed acid fermentation ) .

specific type of microbe may be distinguish by - pron - fermentation pathway and product .
microbes may also be differentiate accord to the substrate - pron - be able to ferment .
eight  .  five catabolism of lipids and proteins

collectively , microbe have the ability to degrade a wide variety of carbon source besides carbohydrate , include lipid and protein .
the catabolic pathway for all of these molecule eventually connect into three  five  four chapter eight 
microbial metabolism
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five glycolysis and the krebs cycle .
 several type of lipid can be microbially degrade .
triglyceride be degrade by extracellular lipase , release fatty acid from the glycerol backbone .
phospholipid be degrade by phospholipase , release fatty acid and the phosphorylate head group from the glycerol backbone .
lipase and phospholipase act as virulence factor for certain pathogenic microbe .

fatty acid can be further degrade inside the cell through β - oxidation , which sequentially remove twocarbon acetyl group from the end of fatty acid chain .

protein degradation involve extracellular protease that degrade large protein into small peptide .
detection of the extracellular protease gelatinase and caseinase can be use to differentiate clinically relevant bacteria .
eight  .  six
photosynthesis  heterotrophs depend on the carbohydrate produce by autotroph , many of which be photosynthetic , convert solar energy into chemical energy .

different photosynthetic organism use different mixture of photosynthetic pigment , which increase the range of the wavelength of light an organism can absorb .

photosystems ( psi and psii )
each contain a light - harvesting complex , compose of multiple protein and associate pigment that absorb light energy .
the light - dependent reaction of photosynthesis convert solar energy into chemical energy , produce atp and nadph or nadh to temporarily store this energy .

in oxygenic photosynthesis , h two o serve as the electron donor to replace the reaction center electron , and oxygen be form as a byproduct .
in anoxygenic photosynthesis , other reduced molecule like h two s or thiosulfate may be use as the electron donor  as such , oxygen be not form as a byproduct .

noncyclic photophosphorylation be use in oxygenic photosynthesis when there be a need for both atp and nadph production .
if a cell 's need for atp outweigh - pron - need for nadph , then - pron - may carry out cyclic photophosphorylation instead , produce only atp .

the light - independent reaction of photosynthesis use the atp and nadph from the light - dependent reaction to fix co two into organic sugar molecule .
eight  .  seven biogeochemical cycles

the recycling of inorganic matter between live organism and - pron - nonlive environment be call a biogeochemical cycle .
microbe play significant role in these cycle .

in the carbon cycle , heterotroph degrade reduce organic molecule to produce carbon dioxide , whereas autotroph fix carbon dioxide to produce organic .
methanogens typically form methane by use co two as a final electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration  methanotroph oxidize the methane , use - pron - as - pron - carbon source .

in the nitrogen cycle , nitrogen - fix bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia ( ammonification ) .
the ammonia can then be oxidize to nitrite and nitrate ( nitrification ) .
nitrate can then be assimilate by plant .
soil bacteria convert nitrate back to nitrogen gas ( denitrification ) .

in sulfur cycling , many anoxygenic photosynthesizer and chemoautotroph use hydrogen sulfide as an electron donor , produce elemental sulfur and then sulfate  sulfate - reduce bacteria and archaea then use sulfate as a final electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration , convert - pron - back to hydrogen sulfide .

human activity that introduce excessive amount of naturally limited nutrient ( like iron , nitrogen , or phosphorus ) to aquatic system may lead to eutrophication .

microbial bioremediation be the use of microbial metabolism to remove or degrade xenobiotic and other environmental contaminant and pollutant .
enhance bioremediation technique may involve the introduction of non - native microbe specifically choose or engineer for - pron - ability to degrade contaminant .
chapter nine microbial growth figure nine  .  one medical device that be insert into a patient 's body often become contaminate with a thin biofilm of microorganism enmesh in the sticky material - pron - secrete .
the electron micrograph ( leave ) show the inside wall of an in - dwelling catheter .
arrow point to the round cell of staphylococcus aureus bacteria attach to the layer of extracellular substrate .
the garbage can ( right ) serve as a rain collector .
the arrow point to a green biofilm on the side of the container .
( credit leave  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit right 
modification of work by nasa )
chapter outline nine  .  one
how microbes grow nine  .  two oxygen requirements for microbial growth nine  .  three
the effect of ph on microbial growth
nine  .  four temperature and microbial growth nine  .  five
other environmental conditions that affect growth nine  .  six medium use for bacterial growth introduction
- pron - be all familiar with the slimy layer on a pond surface or that make rock slippery .
these be example of biofilm - microorganism embed in thin layer of matrix material ( figure nine  .  one ) .
biofilm be long consider random assemblage of cell and have little attention from researcher .
recently , progress in visualization and biochemical method have reveal that biofilm be an organized ecosystem within which many cell , usually of different specie of bacteria , fungus , and algae , interact through cell signal and coordinated response .
the biofilm provide a protect environment in harsh condition and aid colonization by microorganism .
biofilm also have clinical importance .
- pron - form on medical device , resist routine cleaning and sterilization , and cause health - acquire infection .
within the body , biofilm form on the tooth as plaque , in the lung of patient with cystic fibrosis , and on the cardiac tissue of patient with endocarditis .
the slime layer help protect the cell from host immune defense and antibiotic treatment .
study biofilm require new approach .
because of the cell ' adhesion property , many of the method for culture and count cell that be explore in this chapter be not easily apply to biofilm .
this be the beginning of a new era of challenge and reward insight into the way that microorganism grow and thrive in nature .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  six  one nine  .  one
how microbe grow learning objectives  define the generation time for growth base on binary fission  identify and describe the activity of microorganism undergo typical phase of binary fission ( simple cell division ) in a growth curve 
explain several laboratory method use to determine viable and total cell count in population undergo exponential growth

describe example of cell division not involve binary fission , such as budding or fragmentation  describe the formation and characteristic of biofilm 
identify health risk associate with biofilm and how - pron - be address  describe quorum sense and - pron - role in cell - to - cell communication and coordination of cellular activity
the bacterial cell cycle involve the formation of new cell through the replication of dna and partitioning of cellular component into two daughter cell .
in prokaryote , reproduction be always asexual , although extensive genetic recombination in the form of horizontal gene transfer take place , as will be explore in a different chapter .
most bacteria have a single circular chromosome  however , some exception exist .
for example , borrelia burgdorferi , the causative agent of lyme disease , have a linear chromosome .
binary fission
the most common mechanism of cell replication in bacteria be a process call binary fission , which be depict in figure nine  .  two .
before divide , the cell grow and increase - pron - number of cellular component .
next , the replication of dna start at a location on the circular chromosome call the origin of replication , where the chromosome be attach to the inner cell membrane .
replication continue in opposite direction along the chromosome until the terminus be reach .
the center of the enlarged cell constrict until two daughter cell be form , each offspring receive a complete copy of the parental genome and a division of the cytoplasm ( cytokinesis ) .
this process of cytokinesis and cell division be direct by a protein call ftsz . ftsz assemble into a z ring on the cytoplasmic membrane ( figure nine  .  three ) .
the z ring be anchor by ftsz - bind protein and define the division plane between the two daughter cell .
additional protein require for cell division be add to the z ring to form a structure call the divisome .
the divisome activate to produce a peptidoglycan cell wall and build a septum that divide the two daughter cell .
the daughter cell be separate by the division septum , where all of the cell ' outer layer ( the cell wall and outer membrane , if part one jeni , a two  four  - year - old pregnant woman in - pron - second trimester , visit a clinic with complaint of high fever , three  eight  .  nine ° c ( one  zero  two ° f ) , fatigue , and muscle ache - typical flu - like sign and symptom .
jeni exercise regularly and follow a nutritious diet with emphasis on organic food , include raw milk that - pron - purchase from a local farmer 's market .
all of - pron - immunization be up to date .
however , the health - care provider who see jeni be concern and order a blood sample to be send for testing by the microbiology laboratory .

why be the health - care provider concern about jeni 's sign and symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box clinical focus three  six  two chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five present ) must be remodel to complete division .
for example , - pron - know that specific enzyme break bond between the monomer in peptidoglycan and allow addition of new subunit along the division septum .
figure nine  .  two ( a )
the electron micrograph depict two cell of salmonella typhimurium after a binary fission event .
( b ) binary fission in bacteria start with the replication of dna as the cell elongate .
a division septum form in the center of the cell .
two daughter cell of similar size form and separate , each receive a copy of the original chromosome .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention
) figure nine  .  three ftsz protein assemble to form a z ring that be anchor to the plasma membrane .
the z ring pinch the cell envelope to separate the cytoplasm of the new cell .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  six  three

what be the name of the protein that assemble into a z ring to initiate cytokinesis and cell division ?
generation time
in eukaryotic organism , the generation time be the time between the same point of the life cycle in two successive generation .
for example , the typical generation time for the human population be two  five year .
this definition be not practical for bacteria , which may reproduce rapidly or remain dormant for thousand of year .
in prokaryote ( bacteria and archaea ) , the generation time be also call the doubling time and be define as the time - pron - take for the population to double through one round of binary fission .
bacterial double time vary enormously .
whereas escherichia coli can double in as little as two  zero minute under optimal growth condition in the laboratory , bacteria of the same specie may need several day to double in especially harsh environment .
most pathogen grow rapidly , like e . coli , but there be exception .
for example , mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis , have a generation time of between one  five and two  zero hour .
on the other hand , m . leprae , which cause hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) , grow much more slowly , with a double time of one  four day .
calculate number of cells - pron - be possible to predict the number of cell in a population when - pron - divide by binary fission at a constant rate .
as an example , consider what happen if a single cell divide every three  zero minute for two  four hour .
the diagram in figure nine  .  four show the increase in cell number for the first three generation .
the number of cell increase exponentially and can be express as two n , where n be the number of generation .
if cell divide every three  zero minute , after two  four hour , four  eight division would have take place .
if - pron - apply the formula two n , where n be equal to four  eight , the single cell would give rise to two  four  eight or two  eight  one  ,  four  seven  four  ,  nine  seven  six  ,  seven  one  zero  ,  six  five  six cell at four  eight generation ( two  four hour ) .
when deal with such huge number , - pron - be more practical to use scientific notation .
therefore , - pron - express the number of cell as two  .  eight × one  zero  one  four cell .
in - pron - example , - pron - use one cell as the initial number of cell .
for any number of start cell , the formula be adapt as follow 
nn =
n zero two n
nn be the number of cell at any generation n , n zero be the initial number of cell , and n be the number of generation .
micro connections three  six  four chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  four
the parental cell divide and give rise to two daughter cell .
each of the daughter cell , in turn , divide , give a total of four cell in the second generation and eight cell in the third generation .
each division double the number of cell .

with a double time of three  zero minute and a start population size of one × one  zero  five cell , how many cell will be present after two hour , assume no cell death ?
the growth curve microorganisms grow in closed culture ( also know as a batch culture ) , in which no nutrient be add and most waste be not remove , follow a reproducible growth pattern refer to as the growth curve .
an example of a batch culture in nature be a pond in which a small number of cell grow in a closed environment .
the culture density be define as the number of cell per unit volume .
in a closed environment , the culture density be also a measure of the number of cell in the population .
infection of the body do not always follow the growth curve , but correlation can exist depend upon the site and type of infection .
when the number of live cell be plot against time , distinct phase can be observe in the curve ( figure nine  .  five ) .
chapter nine
 microbial growth
three  six  five figure nine  .  five
the growth curve of a bacterial culture be represent by the logarithm of the number of live cell plot as a function of time .
the graph can be divide into four phase accord to the slope , each of which match event in the cell .
the four phase be lag , log , stationary , and death .
the lag phase
the beginning of the growth curve represent a small number of cell , refer to as an inoculum , that be add to a fresh culture medium , a nutritional broth that support growth .
the initial phase of the growth curve be call the lag phase , during which cell be gear up for the next phase of growth .
the number of cell do not change during the lag phase  however , cell grow large and be metabolically active , synthesize protein need to grow within the medium .
if any cell be damage or shock during the transfer to the new medium , repair take place during the lag phase .
the duration of the lag phase be determine by many factor , include the specie and genetic make - up of the cell , the composition of the medium , and the size of the original inoculum .
the log phase
in the logarithmic ( log ) growth phase , sometimes call exponential growth phase , the cell be actively divide by binary fission and - pron - number increase exponentially .
for any give bacterial specie , the generation time under specific growth condition ( nutrient , temperature , ph , and so forth ) be genetically determine , and this generation time be call the intrinsic growth rate .
during the log phase , the relationship between time and number of cell be not linear but exponential  however , the growth curve be often plot on a semilogarithmic graph , as show in figure nine  .  six , which give the appearance of a linear relationship .
three  six  six chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  six
both graph illustrate population growth during the log phase for a bacterial sample with an initial population of one cell and a double time of one hour .
( a ) when plot on an arithmetic scale , the growth rate resemble a curve .
( b ) when plot on a semilogarithmic scale ( mean the value on the y - axis be logarithmic ) , the growth rate appear linear .
cell in the log phase show constant growth rate and uniform metabolic activity .
for this reason , cell in the log phase be preferentially use for industrial application and research work .
the log phase be also the stage where bacteria be the most susceptible to the action of disinfectant and common antibiotic that affect protein , dna , and cell - wall synthesis .
stationary phase
as the number of cell increase through the log phase , several factor contribute to a slowing of the growth rate .
waste product accumulate and nutrient be gradually use up .
in addition , gradual depletion of oxygen begin to limit aerobic cell growth .
this combination of unfavorable condition slow and finally stall population growth .
the total number of live cell reach a plateau refer to as the stationary phase ( figure nine  .  five ) .
in this phase , the number of new cell create by cell division be now equivalent to the number of cell die  thus , the total population of living cell be relatively stagnant .
the culture density in a stationary culture be constant .
the culture 's carrying capacity , or maximum culture density , depend on the type of microorganism in the culture and the specific condition of the culture  however , carry capacity be constant for a give organism grow under the same condition .
during the stationary phase , cell switch to a survival mode of metabolism .
as growth slow , so too do the synthesis of peptidoglycan , protein , and nucleic - acid  thus , stationary culture be less susceptible to antibiotic that disrupt these process .
in bacteria capable of produce endospore , many cell undergo sporulation during the stationary phase .
secondary metabolite , include antibiotic , be synthesize in the stationary phase .
in certain pathogenic bacteria , the stationary phase be also associate with the expression of virulence factor , product that contribute to a microbe 's ability to survive , reproduce , and cause disease in a host organism .
for example , quorum sense in staphylococcus aureus initiate the production of enzyme that can break down human tissue and cellular debris , clear the way for bacteria to spread to new tissue where nutrient be more plentiful .
the death phase
as a culture medium accumulate toxic waste and nutrient be exhaust , cell die in great and great number .
soon , the number of die cell exceed the number of divide cell , lead to an exponential decrease in the number of cell ( figure nine  .  five ) .
this be the aptly name death phase , sometimes call the decline phase .
many cell lyse and release nutrient into the medium , allow survive cell to maintain viability and form endospore .
a chapter nine
 microbial growth three  six  seven few cell , the so - call persister , be characterize by a slow metabolic rate .
persister cell be medically important because - pron - be associate with certain chronic infection , such as tuberculosis , that do not respond to antibiotic treatment .
sustain microbial growth
the growth pattern show in figure nine  .  five take place in a closed environment  nutrient be not add and waste and dead cell be not remove .
in many case , though , - pron - be advantageous to maintain cell in the logarithmic phase of growth .
one example be in industry that harvest microbial product .
a chemostat ( figure nine  .  seven ) be use to maintain a continuous culture in which nutrient be supply at a steady rate .
a control amount of air be mixed in for aerobic process .
bacterial suspension be remove at the same rate as nutrient flow in to maintain an optimal growth environment .
figure nine  .  seven
a chemostat be a culture vessel fit with an opening to add nutrient ( feed ) and an outlet to remove content ( effluent ) , effectively dilute toxic waste and dead cell .
the addition and removal of fluid be adjust to maintain the culture in the logarithmic phase of growth .
if aerobic bacteria be grow , suitable oxygen level be maintain .
 during which phase do growth occur at the fast rate ?

name two factor that limit microbial growth .
measurement of bacterial growth estimate the number of bacterial cell in a sample , know as a bacterial count , be a common task perform by microbiologist .
the number of bacteria in a clinical sample serve as an indication of the extent of an infection .
quality control of drinking water , food , medication , and even cosmetic relie on estimate of bacterial count to detect contamination and prevent the spread of disease .
two major approach be use to measure cell number .
the direct method involve count cell , whereas the indirect method depend on the measurement of cell presence or activity without actually count individual cell .
both direct and indirect method have advantage and disadvantage for specific application .
direct cell count direct cell count refer to count the cell in a liquid culture or colony on a plate .
- pron - be a direct way of estimate three  six  eight chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five how many organism be present in a sample .
let - pron - look first at a simple and fast method that require only a specialized slide and a compound microscope .
the simple way to count bacteria be call the direct microscopic cell count , which involve transfer a know volume of a culture to a calibrate slide and count the cell under a light microscope .
the calibrated slide be call a petroff - hausser chamber ( figure nine  .  eight ) and be similar to a hemocytometer use to count red blood cell .
the central area of the count chamber be etch into square of various size .
a sample of the culture suspension be add to the chamber under a coverslip that be place at a specific height from the surface of the grid .
- pron - be possible to estimate the concentration of cell in the original sample by count individual cell in a number of square and determine the volume of the sample observe .
the area of the square and the height at which the coverslip be position be specify for the chamber .
the concentration must be correct for dilution if the sample be dilute before enumeration .
figure nine  .  eight ( a )
a petroff - hausser chamber be a special slide design for count the bacterial cell in a measure volume of a sample .
a grid be etch on the slide to facilitate precision in counting .
( b )
this diagram illustrate the grid of a petroff - hausser chamber , which be make up of square of know area .
the enlarged view show the square within which bacteria ( red cell ) be count .
if the coverslip be zero  .  two mm above the grid and the square have an area of zero  .  zero  four mm two , then the volume be zero  .  zero  zero  eight mm three , or zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  eight ml .
since there be one  zero cell inside the square , the density of bacteria be one  zero cells /  zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  eight ml , which equate to one  ,  two  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero cell / ml . ( credit a  modification of work by jeffrey m . vinocur )
cell in several small square must be count and the average take to obtain a reliable measurement .
the advantage of the chamber be that the method be easy to use , relatively fast , and inexpensive .
on the downside , the count chamber do not work well with dilute culture because there may not be enough cell to count .
use a count chamber do not necessarily yield an accurate count of the number of live cell because - pron - be not always possible to distinguish between live cell , dead cell , and debris of the same size under the microscope .
however , newly develop fluorescence staining technique make - pron - possible to distinguish viable and dead bacteria .
these viability stain ( or live stain ) bind to nucleic acid , but the primary and secondary stain differ in - pron - ability to cross the cytoplasmic membrane .
the primary stain , which fluoresce green , can penetrate intact cytoplasmic membrane , stain both live and dead cell .
the secondary stain , which fluoresce red , can stain a cell only if the cytoplasmic membrane be considerably damage .
thus , live cell fluoresce green because - pron - only absorb the green stain , whereas dead cell appear red because the red stain displace the green stain on - pron - nucleic acid ( figure nine  .  nine ) .
chapter nine

microbial growth three  six  nine figure nine  .  nine fluorescence staining can be use to differentiate between viable and dead bacterial cell in a sample for purpose of counting .
viable cell be stain green , whereas dead cell be stain red .
( credit  modification of work by panseri s , cunha c , d'alessandro t , sandri m , giavaresi g , maracci m , hung ct , tampieri a )
another technique use an electronic cell counting device ( coulter counter ) to detect and count the change in electrical resistance in a saline solution .
a glass tube with a small opening be immerse in an electrolyte solution .
a first electrode be suspend in the glass tube .
a second electrode be locate outside of the tube .
as cell be draw through the small aperture in the glass tube , - pron - briefly change the resistance measure between the two electrode and the change be record by an electronic sensor ( figure nine  .  one  zero )  each resistance change represent a cell .
the method be rapid and accurate within a range of concentration  however , if the culture be too concentrated , more than one cell may pass through the aperture at any give time and skew the result .
this method also do not differentiate between live and dead cell .
direct count provide an estimate of the total number of cell in a sample .
however , in many situation , - pron - be important to know the number of live , or viable , cell .
count of live cell be need when assess the extent of an infection , the effectiveness of antimicrobial compound and medication , or contamination of food and water .
figure nine  .  one  zero
a coulter counter be an electronic device that count cell .
- pron - measure the change in resistance in an electrolyte solution that take place when a cell pass through a small opening in the inside container wall .
a detector automatically count the number of cell pass through the opening .
( credit b  modification of work by national institutes of health ) three  seven  zero chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
why would - pron - count the number of cell in more than one square in the petroff - hausser chamber to estimate cell number ?

in the viability staining method , why do dead cell appear red ?
plate count
the viable plate count , or simply plate count , be a count of viable or live cell .
- pron - be base on the principle that viable cell replicate and give rise to visible colony when incubate under suitable condition for the speciman .
the result be usually express as colony - form unit per milliliter ( cfu / ml ) rather than cell per milliliter because more than one cell may have land on the same spot to give rise to a single colony .
furthermore , sample of bacteria that grow in cluster or chain be difficult to disperse and a single colony may represent several cell .
some cell be describe as viable but nonculturable and will not form colony on solid medium .
for all these reason , the viable plate count be consider a low estimate of the actual number of live cell .
these limitation do not detract from the usefulness of the method , which provide estimate of live bacterial number .
microbiologist typically count plate with three  zero – three  zero  zero colony .
sample with too few colony ( < three  zero ) do not give statistically reliable number , and overcrowded plate ( > three  zero  zero colony ) make - pron - difficult to accurately count individual colony .
also , count in this range minimize occurrence of more than one bacterial cell form a single colony .
thus , the calculated cfu be close to the true number of live bacteria in the population .
there be two common approach to inoculate plate for viable count  the pour plate and the spread plate method .
although the final inoculation procedure differ between these two method , - pron - both start with a serial dilution of the culture .
serial dilution
the serial dilution of a culture be an important first step before proceed to either the pour plate or spread plate method .
the goal of the serial dilution process be to obtain plate with cfu in the range of three  zero – three  zero  zero , and the process usually involve several dilution in multiple of one  zero to simplify calculation .
the number of serial dilution be choose accord to a preliminary estimate of the culture density .
figure nine  .  one  one illustrate the serial dilution method .
a fix volume of the original culture , one  .  zero ml , be add to and thoroughly mixed with the first dilution tube solution , which contain nine  .  zero ml of sterile broth .
this step represent a dilution factor of one  zero , or one   one  zero , compare with the original culture .
from this first dilution , the same volume , one  .  zero ml , be withdraw and mix with a fresh tube of nine  .  zero ml of dilution solution .
the dilution factor be now one   one  zero  zero compare with the original culture .
this process continue until a series of dilution be produce that will bracket the desire cell concentration for accurate counting .
from each tube , a sample be plate on solid medium use either the pour plate method ( figure nine  .  one  two ) or the spread plate method ( figure nine  .  one  three ) .
the plate be incubate until colony appear .
two to three plate be usually prepare from each dilution and the number of colony count on each plate be average .
in all case , thorough mixing of sample with the dilution medium ( to ensure the cell distribution in the tube be random ) be paramount to obtain reliable result .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  seven  one figure nine  .  one  one serial dilution involve dilute a fix volume of cell mix with dilution solution use the previous dilution as an inoculum .
the result be dilution of the original culture by an exponentially grow factor .
( credit  modification of work by “ leberechtc” / wikimedia commons )
the dilution factor be use to calculate the number of cell in the original cell culture .
in - pron - example , an average of five  zero colony be count on the plate obtain from the one   one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero dilution .
because only zero  .  one ml of suspension be pipette on the plate , the multiplier require to reconstitute the original concentration be one  zero × one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero .
the number of cfu per ml be equal to five  zero × one  zero × one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero = five  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero .
the number of bacteria in the culture be estimate as five million cell / ml .
the colony count obtain from the one   one  zero  zero  zero dilution be three  eight  nine , well below the expect five  zero  zero for a one  zero  - fold difference in dilution .
this highlight the issue of inaccuracy when colony count be great than three  zero  zero and more than one bacterial cell grow into a single colony .
figure nine  .  one  two
in the pour plate method of cell counting , the sample be mixed in liquid warm agar ( four  five – five  zero ° c ) pour into a sterile petri dish and further mix by swirling .
this process be repeat for each serial dilution prepare .
the result colony be count and provide an estimate of the number of cell in the original volume sample .
three  seven  two chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  one  three
in the spread plate method of cell counting , the sample be pour onto solid agar and then spread use a sterile spreader .
this process be repeat for each serial dilution prepare .
the result colony be count and provide an estimate of the number of cell in the original volume sample .
a very dilute sample - drinking water , for example - may not contain enough organism to use either of the plate count method describe .
in such case , the original sample must be concentrate rather than dilute before plate .
this can be accomplish use a modification of the plate count technique call the membrane filtration technique .
know volume be vacuum - filter aseptically through a membrane with a pore size small enough to trap microorganism .
the membrane be transfer to a petri plate contain an appropriate growth medium .
colony be count after incubation .
calculation of the cell density be make by divide the cell count by the volume of filter liquid .
watch this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two serdilpltcvid ) for demonstration of serial dilution and spread plate technique .
the most probable number
the number of microorganism in dilute sample be usually too low to be detect by the plate count method describe thus far .
for these specimen , microbiologist routinely use the most probable number ( mpn ) method , a statistical procedure for estimating of the number of viable microorganism in a sample .
often use for water and food sample , the mpn method evaluate detectable growth by observe change in turbidity or color due to metabolic activity .
a typical application of mpn method be the estimation of the number of coliform in a sample of pond water .
coliform be gram - negative rod bacteria that ferment lactose .
the presence of coliform in water be consider a sign of contamination by fecal matter .
for the method illustrate in figure nine  .  one  four , a series of three dilution of the water sample be test by inoculate five lactose broth tube with one  zero ml of sample , five lactose broth tube with one ml of sample , and five lactose broth tube with zero  .  one ml of sample .
the lactose broth tube contain a ph indicator that change color from red to yellow when the lactose be ferment .
after inoculation and incubation , the tube be examine for an indication of coliform growth by a color change in medium from red to yellow .
the first set of tube ( one  zero  - ml sample ) show growth in all the tube  the second set of tube ( one ml ) show growth in two tube out of five  in the third set of tube , no growth be observe in any of the tube ( zero  .  one  - ml dilution ) .
the number five , two , and zero be compare with figure b one in appendix b , which have be construct use a probability model of the sampling procedure .
from - pron - reading of the table , - pron - conclude that four  nine be the most probable number of bacteria per one  zero  zero ml of link to learn chapter nine
 microbial growth three  seven  three
pond water . no lo figure nine  .  one  four
in the most probable number method , set of five lactose broth tube be inoculate with three different volume of pond water  one  zero ml , one ml , and zero  .  one ml .
bacterial growth be assess through a change in the color of the broth from red to yellow as lactose be ferment .

what be a colony - form unit ?

what two method be frequently use to estimate bacterial number in water sample ?
indirect cell count
besides direct method of count cell , other method , base on an indirect detection of cell density , be commonly use to estimate and compare cell density in a culture .
the foremost approach be to measure the turbidity ( cloudiness ) of a sample of bacteria in a liquid suspension .
the laboratory instrument use to measure turbidity be call a spectrophotometer ( figure nine  .  one  five ) .
in a spectrophotometer , a light beam be transmit through a bacterial suspension , the light pass through the suspension be measure by a detector , and the amount of light pass through the sample and reach the detector be convert to either percent transmission or a logarithmic value call absorbance ( optical density ) .
as the number of bacteria in a suspension increase , the turbidity also increase and cause less light to reach the detector .
the decrease in light pass through the sample and reach the detector be associate with a decrease in percent transmission and increase in absorbance measure by the spectrophotometer .
measure turbidity be a fast method to estimate cell density as long as there be enough cell in a sample to produce turbidity .
- pron - be possible to correlate turbidity reading to the actual number of cell by perform a viable plate count of sample take from culture have a range of absorbance value .
use these value , a calibration curve be generate by plot turbidity as a function of cell density .
once the calibration curve have be produce , - pron - can be three  seven  four chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five use to estimate cell count for all sample obtain or culture under similar condition and with density within the range of value use to construct the curve .
figure nine  .  one  five ( a )
a spectrophotometer be commonly use to measure the turbidity of a bacterial cell suspension as an indirect measure of cell density .
( b )
a spectrophotometer work by split white light from a source into a spectrum .
the spectrophotometer allow choice of the wavelength of light to use for the measurement .
the optical density ( turbidity ) of the sample will depend on the wavelength , so once one wavelength be choose , - pron - must be use consistently .
the filtered light pass through the sample ( or a control with only medium ) and the light intensity be measure by a detector .
the light pass into a suspension of bacteria be scatter by the cell in such a way that some fraction of - pron - never reach the detector .
this scattering happen to a far less degree in the control tube with only the medium .
( credit a  modification of work by hwang hs , kim ms  credit b
“ test tube photo
" 
modification of work by suzanne wakim )
measure dry weight of a culture sample be another indirect method of evaluate culture density without directly measure cell count .
the cell suspension use for weighing must be concentrate by filtration or centrifugation , wash , and then dry before the measurement be take .
the degree of drying must be standardize to account for residual water content .
this method be especially useful for filamentous microorganism , which be difficult to enumerate by direct or viable plate count .
as - pron - have see , method to estimate viable cell number can be labor intensive and take time because cell must be grow .
recently , indirect way of measure live cell have be develop that be both fast and easy to implement .
these method measure cell activity by follow the production of metabolic product or disappearance of reactant .
adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) formation , biosynthesis of protein and nucleic acid , and consumption of oxygen can all be monitor to estimate the number of cell .

what be the purpose of a calibration curve when estimate cell count from turbidity measurement ?

what be the new indirect method of count live cell ?
alternative patterns of cell division binary fission be the most common pattern of cell division in prokaryote , but - pron - be not the only one .
other mechanism usually involve asymmetrical division ( as in bud ) or production of spore in aerial filament .
in some cyanobacteria , many nucleoid may accumulate in an enlarged round cell or along a filament , lead to the generation of many new cell at once .
the new cell often split from the parent filament and float away in a chapter nine  microbial growth three  seven  five process call fragmentation ( figure nine  .  one  six ) .
fragmentation be commonly observe in the actinomycetes , a group of gram - positive , anaerobic bacteria commonly find in soil .
another curious example of cell division in prokaryote , reminiscent of live birth in animal , be exhibit by the giant bacterium epulopiscium .
several daughter cell grow fully in the parent cell , which eventually disintegrate , release the new cell to the environment .
other specie may form a long narrow extension at one pole in a process call budding .
the tip of the extension swell and form a small cell , the bud that eventually detach from the parent cell .
budding be most common in yeast ( figure nine  .  one  six ) , but - pron - be also observe in prosthecate bacteria and some cyanobacteria .
figure nine  .  one  six ( a )
filamentous cyanobacteria , like those picture here , replicate by fragmentation .
( b )
in this electron micrograph , cell of the bacterium gemmata obscuriglobus be bud .
the large cell be the mother cell .
label indicate the nucleoid ( n ) and the still - form nuclear envelope ( ne ) of the daughter cell .
( credit a  modification of work by csiro  credit b  modification of work by kuo - chang lee , rick i webb and john a fuerst )
the soil bacteria actinomyces grow in long filament divide by septum , similar to the mycelia see in fungi , result in long cell with multiple nucleoid .
environmental signal , probably relate to low nutrient availability , lead to the formation of aerial filament .
within these aerial filament , elongated cell divide simultaneously .
the new cell , which contain a single nucleoid , develop into spore that give rise to new colony .

identify at least one difference between fragmentation and budding .
biofilm
in nature , microorganism grow mainly in biofilm , complex and dynamic ecosystem that form on a variety of environmental surface , from industrial conduit and water treatment pipeline to rock in river bed .
biofilm be not restrict to solid surface substrate , however .
almost any surface in a liquid environment contain some minimal nutrient will eventually develop a biofilm .
microbial mat that float on water , for example , be biofilm that contain large population of photosynthetic microorganism .
biofilm find in the human mouth may contain hundred of bacterial specie .
regardless of the environment where - pron - occur , biofilm be not random collection of microorganism  rather , - pron - be highly structure community that provide a selective advantage to - pron - constituent microorganism .
biofilm structure observation use confocal microscopy have show that environmental condition influence the overall structure of biofilm .
filamentous biofilm call streamer form in rapidly flow water , such as freshwater stream , eddy , and specially design laboratory flow cell that replicate growth condition in fast - move fluid .
the streamer be three  seven  six chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five anchor to the substrate by a “ head " and the “ tail
" float downstream in the current .
in still or slow - move water , biofilm mainly assume a mushroom - like shape .
the structure of biofilm may also change with other environmental condition such as nutrient availability .
detailed observation of biofilm under confocal laser and scan electron microscope reveal cluster of microorganism embed in a matrix intersperse with open water channel .
the extracellular matrix consist of extracellular polymeric substance ( eps ) secrete by the organism in the biofilm .
the extracellular matrix represent a large fraction of the biofilm , account for five  zero %– nine  zero % of the total dry mass .
the property of the eps vary accord to the resident organism and environmental condition .
eps be a hydrated gel compose primarily of polysaccharide and contain other macromolecule such as protein , nucleic acid , and lipid .
- pron - play a key role in maintain the integrity and function of the biofilm .
channel in the eps allow movement of nutrient , waste , and gas throughout the biofilm .
this keep the cell hydrate , prevent desiccation .
eps also shelter organism in the biofilm from predation by other microbe or cell ( e . g . , protozoan , white blood cell in the human body ) .
biofilm formation free - float microbial cell that live in an aquatic environment be call planktonic cell .
the formation of a biofilm essentially involve the attachment of planktonic cell to a substrate , where - pron - become sessile ( attach to a surface ) .
this occur in stage , as depict in figure nine  .  one  seven .
the first stage involve the attachment of planktonic cell to a surface coat with a conditioning film of organic material .
at this point , attachment to the substrate be reversible , but as cell express new phenotype that facilitate the formation of eps , - pron - transition from a planktonic to a sessile lifestyle .
the biofilm develop characteristic structure , include an extensive matrix and water channel .
appendage such as fimbriae , pili , and flagella interact with the eps , and microscopy and genetic analysis suggest that such structure be require for the establishment of a mature biofilm .
in the last stage of the biofilm life cycle , cell on the periphery of the biofilm revert to a planktonic lifestyle , slough off the mature biofilm to colonize new site .
this stage be refer to as dispersal .
figure nine  .  one  seven stage in the formation and life cycle of a biofilm .
( credit  modification of work by public library of science and american society for microbiology )
within a biofilm , different specie of microorganism establish metabolic collaboration in which the waste product of one organism become the nutrient for another .
for example , aerobic microorganism consume oxygen , create chapter nine
 microbial growth three  seven  seven anaerobic region that promote the growth of anaerobe .
this occur in many polymicrobial infection that involve both aerobic and anaerobic pathogen .
the mechanism by which cell in a biofilm coordinate - pron - activity in response to environmental stimuli be call quorum sense .
quorum sense - which can occur between cell of different specie within a biofilm - enable microorganism to detect - pron - cell density through the release and binding of small , diffusible molecule call autoinducer .
when the cell population reach a critical threshold ( a quorum ) , these autoinducer initiate a cascade of reaction that activate gene associate with cellular function that be beneficial only when the population reach a critical density .
for example , in some pathogen , synthesis of virulence factor only begin when enough cell be present to overwhelm the immune defense of the host .
although mostly study in bacterial population , quorum sense take place between bacteria and eukaryote and between eukaryotic cell such as the fungus candida albican , a common member of the human microbiota that can cause infection in immunocompromised individual .
the signal molecule in quorum sense belong to two major class .
gram - negative bacteria communicate mainly use n - acylate homoserine lactone , whereas gram - positive bacteria mostly use small peptide ( figure nine  .  one  eight ) .
in all case , the first step in quorum sense consist of the binding of the autoinducer to - pron - specific receptor only when a threshold concentration of signal molecule be reach .
once bind to the receptor take place , a cascade of signal event lead to change in gene expression .
the result be the activation of biological response link to quorum sense , notably an increase in the production of signal molecule - pron - , hence the term autoinducer .
figure nine  .  one  eight short peptide in gram - positive bacteria and n - acetylate homoserine lactone in gram - negative bacteria act as autoinducer in quorum sense and mediate the coordinate response of bacterial cell .
the r side chain of the n - acetylate homoserine lactone be specific for the specie of gram - negative bacteria .
some secreted homoserine lactone be recognize by more than one specie .
biofilms and human health
the human body harbor many type of biofilm , some beneficial and some harmful .
for example , the layer of normal microbiota line the intestinal and respiratory mucosa play a role in ward off infection by pathogen .
however , other biofilm in the body can have a detrimental effect on health .
for example , the plaque that form on tooth be a biofilm that can contribute to dental and periodontal disease .
biofilm can also form in wound , sometimes cause serious infection that can spread .
the bacterium pseudomonas aeruginosa often colonize biofilm in the airway of patient with cystic fibrosis , cause chronic and sometimes fatal infection of the lung .
biofilm can also form on medical device use in or on the body , cause infection in patient with in - dwell catheter , artificial joint , or contact lense .
pathogens embed within biofilm exhibit a high resistance to antibiotic than - pron - free - float counterpart .
several hypothesis have be propose to explain why .
cell in the deep layer of a biofilm be metabolically inactive and may be less susceptible to the action of antibiotic that disrupt metabolic activity .
the eps may also slow the diffusion of antibiotic and antiseptic , prevent - pron - from reach cell in the deep layer of the biofilm .
phenotypic change may also contribute to the increase resistance exhibit by bacterial cell in biofilm .
for example , the increase production of efflux pump , membrane - embed protein that actively extrude antibiotic out of bacterial cell , have be show to be an important mechanism of antibiotic resistance among biofilm - associate bacteria .
finally , biofilm provide an ideal environment for the exchange of extrachromosomal dna , which often three  seven  eight chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five include gene that confer antibiotic resistance .

what be the matrix of a biofilm compose of ?

what be the role of quorum sense in a biofilm ?
nine  .  two oxygen requirements for microbial growth learning objectives
 interpret visual datum demonstrate minimum , optimum , and maximum oxygen or carbon dioxide requirement for growth  identify and describe different category of microbe with requirement for growth with or without oxygen  obligate aerobe , obligate anaerobe , facultative anaerobe , aerotolerant anaerobe , microaerophile , and capnophile  give example of microorganism for each category of growth requirement
ask most people "
what be the major requirement for life ?
" and the answer be likely to include water and oxygen .
few would argue about the need for water , but what about oxygen ?
can there be life without oxygen ?
the answer be that molecular oxygen ( o two ) be not always need .
the early sign of life be date to a period when condition on earth be highly reduce and free oxygen gas be essentially nonexistent .
only after cyanobacteria start release oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis and the capacity of iron in the ocean for take up oxygen be exhaust do oxygen level increase in the atmosphere .
this event , often refer to as the great oxygenation event or the oxygen revolution , cause a massive extinction .
most organism could not survive the powerful oxidative property of reactive oxygen specie ( ros ) , highly unstable ion and molecule derive from partial reduction of oxygen that can damage virtually any macromolecule or structure with which - pron - come in contact .
singlet oxygen ( o two ) ,
superoxide
⎛ ⎝o two −⎞ ⎠ , peroxide ( h two o two ) , hydroxyl radical ( oh ) , and hypochlorite ion ( ocl− ) , the active ingredient of household bleach , be all example of ros .
the organism that be able to detoxify reactive oxygen specie harness the high electronegativity of oxygen to produce free energy for - pron - metabolism and thrive in the new environment .
oxygen requirements of microorganisms many ecosystem be still free of molecular oxygen .
some be find in extreme location , such as deep in the ocean or in earth 's crust  other be part of - pron - everyday landscape , such as marsh , bog , and sewer .
within the body of human and other animal , region with little or no oxygen provide an anaerobic environment for microorganism .
( figure nine  .  one  nine ) .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  seven  nine figure nine  .  one  nine
anaerobic environment be still common on earth .
- pron - include environment like ( a ) a bog where undisturbed dense sediment be virtually devoid of oxygen , and ( b ) the ruman ( the first compartment of a cow 's stomach ) , which provide an oxygen - free incubator for methanogen and other obligate anaerobic bacteria .
( credit a  modification of work by national park service  credit b  modification of work by us department of agriculture )
- pron - can easily observe different requirement for molecular oxygen by grow bacteria in thioglycolate tube culture .
a test - tube culture start with autoclave thioglycolate medium contain a low percentage of agar to allow motile bacteria to move throughout the medium .
thioglycolate have strong reduce property and autoclave flush out most of the oxygen .
the tube be inoculate with the bacterial culture to be test and incubate at an appropriate temperature .
over time , oxygen slowly diffuse throughout the thioglycolate tube culture from the top .
bacterial density increase in the area where oxygen concentration be best suited for the growth of that particular organism .
the growth of bacteria with vary oxygen requirement in thioglycolate tube be illustrate in figure nine  .  two  zero .
in tube a , all the growth be see at the top of the tube .
the bacteria be obligate ( strict ) aerobe that can not grow without an abundant supply of oxygen .
tube b look like the opposite of tube a . bacteria grow at the bottom of tube b . those be obligate anaerobe , which be kill by oxygen .
tube c show heavy growth at the top of the tube and growth throughout the tube , a typical result with facultative anaerobe .
facultative anaerobe be organism that thrive in the presence of oxygen but also grow in - pron - absence by rely on fermentation or anaerobic respiration , if there be a suitable electron acceptor other than oxygen and the organism be able to perform anaerobic respiration .
the aerotolerant anaerobe in tube d be indifferent to the presence of oxygen .
- pron - do not use oxygen because - pron - usually have a fermentative metabolism , but - pron - be not harm by the presence of oxygen as obligate anaerobe be .
tube e on the right show a “ goldilocks " culture .
the oxygen level have to be just right for growth , not too much and not too little .
these microaerophile be bacteria that require a minimum level of oxygen for growth , about one %– one  zero % , well below the two  one % find in the atmosphere .
example of obligate aerobe be mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causative agent of tuberculosis and micrococcus luteus , a gram - positive bacterium that colonize the skin .
neisseria meningitidis , the causative agent of severe bacterial meningitis , and n . gonorrhoeae , the causative agent of sexually transmit gonorrhea , be also obligate aerobe .
three  eight  zero chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  two  zero diagram of bacterial cell distribution in thioglycolate tube .
many obligate anaerobe be find in the environment where anaerobic condition exist , such as in deep sediment of soil , still water , and at the bottom of the deep ocean where there be no photosynthetic life .
anaerobic condition also exist naturally in the intestinal tract of animal .
obligate anaerobe , mainly bacteroidetes , represent a large fraction of the microbe in the human gut .
transient anaerobic condition exist when tissue be not supply with blood circulation  - pron - die and become an ideal breeding ground for obligate anaerobe .
another type of obligate anaerobe encounter in the human body be the gram - positive , rod - shape clostridium spp .
- pron - ability to form endospore allow - pron - to survive in the presence of oxygen .
one of the major cause of health - acquire infection be c . difficile , know as c . diff .
prolonged use of antibiotic for other infection increase the probability of a patient develop a secondary c . difficile infection .
antibiotic treatment disrupt the balance of microorganism in the intestine and allow the colonization of the gut by c . difficile , cause a significant inflammation of the colon .
other clostridium responsible for serious infection include c . tetani , the agent of tetanus , and c . perfringen , which cause gas gangrene .
in both case , the infection start in necrotic tissue ( dead tissue that be not supply with oxygen by blood circulation ) .
this be the reason that deep puncture wound be associate with tetanus .
when tissue death be accompany by lack of circulation , gangrene be always a danger .
the study of obligate anaerobe require special equipment .
obligate anaerobic bacteria must be grow under condition devoid of oxygen .
the most common approach be culture in an anaerobic jar ( figure nine  .  two  one ) .
anaerobic jar include chemical pack that remove oxygen and release carbon dioxide ( co two ) .
an anaerobic chamber be an enclosed box from which all oxygen be remove .
glove seal to opening in the box allow handling of the culture without expose the culture to air ( figure nine  .  two  one ) .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  eight  one figure nine  .  two  one
( a )
an anaerobic jar be picture that be hold nine petri plate support culture .
( b ) opening in the side of an anaerobic box be seal by glove - like sleeve that allow for the handling of culture inside the box .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by nist )
staphylococci and enterobacteriaceae be example of facultative anaerobe .
staphylococci be find on the skin and upper respiratory tract .
enterobacteriaceae be find primarily in the gut and upper respiratory tract but can sometimes spread to the urinary tract , where - pron - be capable of cause infection .
- pron - be not unusual to see mix bacterial infection in which the facultative anaerobe use up the oxygen , create an environment for the obligate anaerobe to flourish .
example of aerotolerant anaerobe include lactobacilli and streptococci , both find in the oral microbiota .
campylobacter jejuni , which cause gastrointestinal infection , be an example of a microaerophile and be grow under low - oxygen condition .
the optimum oxygen concentration , as the name imply , be the ideal concentration of oxygen for a particular microorganism .
the low concentration of oxygen that allow growth be call the minimum permissive oxygen concentration .
the highest tolerate concentration of oxygen be the maximum permissive oxygen concentration .
the organism will not grow outside the range of oxygen level find between the minimum and maximum permissive oxygen concentration .

would - pron - expect the old bacterial lineage to be aerobic or anaerobic ?

which bacteria grow at the top of a thioglycolate tube , and which grow at the bottom of the tube ?
an unwelcome anaerobe charles be a retire bus driver who develop type two diabete over one  zero year ago .
since - pron - retirement , - pron - lifestyle have become very sedentary and - pron - have put on a substantial amount of weight .
although - pron - have feel tingling and numbness in - pron - left foot for a while , - pron - have not be worried because - pron - think - pron - foot be simply " fall asleep .
"
recently , a scratch on - pron - foot do not seem to be heal and be become increasingly ugly .
because the sore do not bother - pron - much , charles figure - pron - could not be serious until - pron - daughter notice a purplish discoloration spread on the skin and ooze ( figure nine  .  two  two ) .
when - pron - be finally see by - pron - physician , charles be rush to the operating room .
- pron - open sore , or ulcer , be the result of a diabetic foot .
case in point three  eight  two chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the concern here be that gas gangrene may have take hold in the dead tissue .
the most likely agent of gas gangrene be clostridium perfringen , an endospore - form , gram - positive bacterium .
- pron - be an obligate anaerobe that grow in tissue devoid of oxygen .
since dead tissue be no longer supply with oxygen by the circulatory system , the dead tissue provide pocket of ideal environment for the growth of c . perfringen .
a surgeon examine the ulcer and radiograph of charles 's foot and determine that the bone be not yet infect .
the wound will have to be surgically debride ( debridement refer to the removal of dead and infected tissue ) and a sample send for microbiological lab analysis , but charles will not have to have - pron - foot amputate .
many diabetic patient be not so lucky .
in two  zero  zero  eight , nearly seven  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero diabetic patient in the united states lose a foot or limb to amputation , accord to statistic from the centers for disease control and prevention . [ one ]

which growth condition would - pron - recommend for the detection of c . perfringen ?
figure nine  .  two  two
this clinical photo depict ulcer on the foot of a diabetic patient .
dead tissue accumulate in ulcer can provide an ideal growth environment for the anaerobe c . perfringen , a causative agent of gas gangrene .
( credit 
shigeo kono , reiko nakagawachi , jun arata , benjamin a lipsky )
detoxification of reactive oxygen species aerobic respiration constantly generate reactive oxygen specie ( ros ) , byproduct that must be detoxify .
even organism that do not use aerobic respiration need some way to break down some of the ros that may form from atmospheric oxygen .
three main enzyme break down those toxic byproduct  superoxide dismutase , peroxidase , and catalase .
each one catalyze a different reaction .
reaction of type see in reaction one be catalyze by peroxidase .
( one ) x − ( two h+ )
+
h two o two
→
oxidize - x +
two h two o
in these reaction , an electron donor ( reduce compound  e . g . , reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [ nadh ] ) oxidize hydrogen peroxide , or other peroxide , to water .
the enzyme play an important role by limit the damage cause by peroxidation of membrane lipid .
reaction two be mediate by the enzyme superoxide dismutase ( sod ) and break down the powerful superoxide anion generate by aerobic metabolism 
( two ) two o two − + two h+
→ h two o two + o two
the enzyme catalase convert hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen as show in reaction three .
( three ) two h two o two
→
two h two o + o two obligate anaerobe usually lack all three enzyme .
aerotolerant anaerobe do have sod but no catalase .
reaction one .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ live with diabetes 
keep - pron - foot healthy .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / features /
diabetesfoothealth / chapter nine
 microbial growth three  eight  three three , show occur in figure nine  .  two  three , be the basis of a useful and rapid test to distinguish streptococci , which be aerotolerant and do not possess catalase , from staphylococci , which be facultative anaerobe .
a sample of culture rapidly mix in a drop of three % hydrogen peroxide will release bubble if the culture be catalase positive .
figure nine  .  two  three
the catalase test detect the presence of the enzyme catalase by note whether bubble be release when hydrogen peroxide be add to a culture sample .
compare the positive result ( right ) with the negative result ( left ) .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention ) bacteria that grow good in a high concentration of co two and a low concentration of oxygen than present in the atmosphere be call capnophile .
one common approach to grow capnophile be to use a candle jar .
a candle jar consist of a jar with a tight - fit lid that can accommodate the culture and a candle .
after the culture be add to the jar , the candle be light and the lid close .
as the candle burn , - pron - consume most of the oxygen present and release co two .

what substance be add to a sample to detect catalase ?

what be the function of the candle in a candle jar ?
part two
the health - care provider who see jeni be concern primarily because of - pron - pregnancy .
- pron - condition enhance the risk for infection and make - pron - more vulnerable to those infection .
the immune system be downregulate during pregnancy , and pathogen that cross the placenta can be very dangerous for the fetus .
a note on the provider 's order to the microbiology lab mention a suspicion of infection by listeria monocytogene , base on the sign and symptom exhibit by the patient .
jeni 's blood sample be streak directly on sheep blood agar , a medium contain tryptic soy agar enrich with five % sheep blood .
( blood be consider sterile  therefore , compete microorganism be not expect in the medium . )
the inoculated plate be incubate at three  seven ° c for two  four to four  eight hour .
small grayish colony surround by a clear zone emerge .
such colony be typical of listeria and other pathogen such as streptococci  the clear zone surround the colony indicate complete lysis of blood in the medium , refer to as beta - hemolysis ( figure nine  .  two  four ) .
when test for the presence of catalase , the colony give a positive response , eliminate streptococcus as a possible cause .
furthermore , a gram stain show short gram - positive bacilli .
cell from a broth culture grow at room temperature display the tumbling motility clinical focus three  eight  four chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five characteristic of listeria ( figure nine  .  two  four ) .
all of these clue lead the lab to positively confirm the presence of listeria in jeni 's blood sample .

how serious be jeni 's condition and what be the appropriate treatment ?
figure nine  .  two  four
( a )
a sample blood agar test show beta - hemolysis .
( b )
a sample motility test show both positive and negative result .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by “ veedunn” / flickr )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
nine  .  three
the effect of ph on microbial growth learning objectives

illustrate and briefly describe minimum , optimum , and maximum ph requirement for growth 
identify and describe the different category of microbe with ph requirement for growth 
acidophile , neutrophile , and alkaliphile  give example of microorganism for each category of ph requirement yogurt , pickle , sauerkraut , and lime - season dish all owe - pron - tangy taste to a high acid content ( figure nine  .  two  five ) .
recall that acidity be a function of the concentration of hydrogen ion [ h+ ] and be measure as ph .
environment with ph value below seven  .  zero be consider acidic , whereas those with ph value above seven  .  zero be consider basic .
extreme ph affect the structure of all macromolecule .
the hydrogen bond hold together strand of dna break up at high ph .
lipid be hydrolyze by an extremely basic ph .
the proton motive force responsible for production of atp in cellular respiration depend on the concentration gradient of h+ across the plasma membrane ( see cellular respiration ) .
if h+ ion be neutralize by hydroxide ion , the concentration gradient collapse and impair energy production .
but the component most sensitive to ph in the cell be - pron - workhorse , the protein .
moderate change in ph modify the ionization of amino - acid functional group and disrupt hydrogen bonding , which , in turn , promote change in the folding of the molecule , promote denaturation and destroy activity .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  eight  five figure nine  .  two  five lactic acid bacteria that ferment milk into yogurt or transform vegetable in pickle thrive at a ph close to four  .  zero .
sauerkraut and dish such as pico de gallo owe - pron - tangy flavor to - pron - acidity .
acidic food have be a mainstay of the human diet for century , partly because most microbe that cause food spoilage grow good at a near neutral ph and do not tolerate acidity well .
( credit “ yogurt
" 
modification of work by “ nina . jsc” / flickr  credit “ pickle
" 
modification of work by noah sussman  credit “ sauerkraut
" 
modification of work by jesse labuff
 credit “ pico de gallo "  modification of work by “ regan seven  six ” / flickr )
the optimum growth ph be the most favorable ph for the growth of an organism .
the low ph value that anph .
organism can tolerate be call the minimum growth ph and the high ph be the maximum growth ph .
these value can cover a wide range , which be important for the preservation of food and to microorganism ' survival in the stomach .
for example , the optimum growth ph of salmonella spp . be seven  .  zero – seven  .  five , but the minimum growth ph be close to four  .  two .
most bacteria be neutrophile , mean - pron - grow optimally at a ph within one or two ph unit of the neutral ph of seven ( see figure nine  .  two  six ) .
most familiar bacteria , like escherichia coli , staphylococci , and salmonella spp .
be neutrophile and do not fare well in the acidic ph of the stomach .
however , there be pathogenic strain of e . coli , s . typhi , and other specie of intestinal pathogen that be much more resistant to stomach acid .
in comparison , fungi thrive at slightly acidic ph value of five  .  zero – six  .  zero .
microorganism that grow optimally at ph less than five  .  five  five be call acidophile .
for example , the sulfur - oxidize sulfolobus spp .
isolate from sulfur mud field and hot spring in yellowstone national park be extreme acidophile .
these archaea survive at ph value of two  .  five – three  .  five .
specie of the archaean genus ferroplasma live in acid mine drainage at ph value of zero – two  .  nine .
lactobacillus bacteria , which be an important part of the normal microbiota of the vagina , can tolerate acidic environment at ph value three  .  five – six  .  eight and also contribute to the acidity of the vagina ( ph of four , except at the onset of menstruation ) through - pron - metabolic production of lactic acid .
the vagina 's acidity play an important role in inhibit other microbe that be less tolerant of acidity .
acidophilic microorganism display a number of adaptation to survive in strong acidic environment .
for example , protein show increase negative surface charge that stabilize - pron - at low ph .
pump actively eject h+ ion out of the cell .
the change in the composition of membrane phospholipid probably reflect the need to maintain membrane fluidity at low ph .
three  eight  six chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  two  six
the curve show the approximate ph range for the growth of the different class of ph - specific prokaryote .
each curve have an optimal ph and extreme ph value at which growth be much reduce .
most bacteria be neutrophile and grow good at near - neutral ph ( center curve ) .
acidophile have optimal growth at ph value near three and alkaliphile have optimal growth at ph value above nine .
at the other end of the spectrum be alkaliphile , microorganism that grow good at ph between eight  .  zero and one  zero  .  five .
vibrio cholerae , the pathogenic agent of cholera , grow good at the slightly basic ph of eight  .  zero  - pron - can survive ph value of one  one  .  zero but be inactivate by the acid of the stomach .
when - pron - come to survival at high ph , the bright pink archaean natronobacterium , find in the soda lake of the african rift valley , may hold the record at a ph of one  zero  .  five ( figure nine  .  two  seven ) .
extreme alkaliphile have adapt to - pron - harsh environment through evolutionary modification of lipid and protein structure and compensatory mechanism to maintain the proton motive force in an alkaline environment .
for example , the alkaliphile bacillus firmus derive the energy for transport reaction and motility from a na+ ion gradient rather than a proton motive force .
many enzyme from alkaliphile have a high isoelectric point , due to an increase in the number of basic amino acid , than homologous enzyme from neutrophile .
figure nine  .  two  seven view from space of lake natron in tanzania .
the pink color be due to the pigmentation of the extreme alkaliphilic and halophilic microbe that colonize the lake .
( credit  nasa )
chapter nine
 microbial growth
three  eight  seven survival at the low ph of the stomach peptic ulcer ( or stomach ulcer ) be painful sore on the stomach lining .
until the one  nine  eight  zero , - pron - be believe to be cause by spicy food , stress , or a combination of both .
patient be typically advise to eat bland food , take anti - acid medication , and avoid stress .
these remedy be not particularly effective , and the condition often recur .
this all change dramatically when the real cause of most peptic ulcer be discover to be a slim , corkscrew - shape bacterium , helicobacter pylorus .
this organism be identify and isolate by barry marshall and robin warren , whose discovery earn - pron - the nobel prize in medicine in two  zero  zero  five .
the ability of h . pylorus to survive the low ph of the stomach would seem to suggest that - pron - be an extreme acidophile .
as - pron - turn out , this be not the case .
in fact , h . pylorus be a neutrophile .
so , how do - pron - survive in the stomach ?
remarkably , h . pylorus create a microenvironment in which the ph be nearly neutral .
- pron - achieve this by produce large amount of the enzyme urease , which break down urea to form nh four + and co two .
the ammonium ion raise the ph of the immediate environment .
this metabolic capability of h . pylorus be the basis of an accurate , noninvasive test for infection .
the patient be give a solution of urea contain radioactively label carbon atom .
if h . pylorus be present in the stomach , - pron - will rapidly break down the urea , produce radioactive co two that can be detect in the patient 's breath .
because peptic ulcer may lead to gastric cancer , patient who be determined to have h . pylorus infection be treat with antibiotic .

what effect do extreme of ph have on protein ?

what ph - adaptive type of bacteria would most human pathogen be ?
nine  .  four
temperature and microbial growth
learning objectives

illustrate and briefly describe minimum , optimum , and maximum temperature requirement for growth 
identify and describe different category of microbe with temperature requirement for growth 
psychrophile , psychrotroph , mesophile , thermophile , hyperthermophile

give example of microorganism in each category of temperature tolerance
when the exploration of lake whillans start in antarctica , researcher do not expect to find much life .
constant subzero temperature and lack of obvious source of nutrient do not seem to be condition that would support a thriving ecosystem .
to - pron - surprise , the sample retrieve from the lake show abundant microbial life .
in a different but equally harsh setting , bacteria grow at the bottom of the ocean in sea vent ( figure nine  .  two  eight ) , where temperature can reach three  four  zero ° c ( seven  zero  zero ° f ) .
microbe can be roughly classify accord to the range of temperature at which - pron - can grow .
the growth rate be the high at the optimum growth temperature for the organism .
the low temperature at which the organism can survive and replicate be - pron - minimum growth temperature .
the high temperature at which growth can occur be - pron - maximum growth temperature .
the follow range of permissive growth temperature be approximate only and can vary accord to other environmental factor .
organisms categorize as mesophile ( " middle loving " ) be adapt to moderate temperature , with optimal growth micro connections three  eight  eight chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five temperature range from room temperature ( about two  zero ° c ) to about four  five ° c .
as would be expect from the core temperature of the human body , three  seven ° c ( nine  eight  .  six ° f ) , normal human microbiota and pathogen ( e . g . , e . coli , salmonella spp . , and lactobacillus spp . )
be mesophile .
organisms call psychrotroph , also know as psychrotolerant , prefer cooler environment , from a high temperature of two  five ° c to refrigeration temperature about four ° c .
- pron - be find in many natural environment in temperate climate .
- pron - be also responsible for the spoilage of refrigerated food .
resolution
the presence of listeria in jeni 's blood suggest that - pron - symptom be due to listeriosis , an infection cause by l . monocytogene .
listeriosis be a serious infection with a two  zero % mortality rate and be a particular risk to jeni 's fetus .
a sample from the amniotic fluid culture for the presence of listeria give negative result .
because the absence of organism do not rule out the possibility of infection , a molecular test base on the nucleic acid amplification of the one  six s ribosomal rna of listeria be perform to confirm that no bacteria cross the placenta .
fortunately , the result from the molecular test be also negative .
jeni be admit to the hospital for treatment and recovery .
- pron - receive a high dose of two antibiotic intravenously for two week .
the preferred drug for the treatment of listeriosis be ampicillin or penicillin g with an aminoglycoside antibiotic .
resistance to common antibiotic be still rare in listeria and antibiotic treatment be usually successful .
- pron - be release to home care after a week and fully recover from - pron - infection .
l . monocytogene be a gram - positive short rod find in soil , water , and food .
- pron - be classify as a psychrophile and be halotolerant .
- pron - ability to multiply at refrigeration temperature ( four – one  zero ° c ) and - pron - tolerance for high concentration of salt ( up to one  zero % sodium chloride [ nacl ] ) make - pron - a frequent source of food poisoning .
because listeria can infect animal , - pron - often contaminate food such as meat , fish , or dairy product .
contamination of commercial food can often be trace to persistent biofilm that form on manufacturing equipment that be not sufficiently clean .
listeria infection be relatively common among pregnant woman because the elevated level of progesterone downregulate the immune system , make - pron - more vulnerable to infection .
the pathogen can cross the placenta and infect the fetus , often result in miscarriage , stillbirth , or fatal neonatal infection .
pregnant woman be thus advise to avoid consumption of soft cheese , refrigerated cold cut , smoked seafood , and unpasteurized dairy product .
because listeria bacteria can easily be confuse with diphtheroid , another common group of gram - positive rod , - pron - be important to alert the laboratory when listeriosis be suspect .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
the organism retrieve from arctic lake such as lake whillans be consider extreme psychrophile ( cold loving ) .
psychrophile be microorganism that can grow at zero ° c and below , have an optimum growth temperature close to one  five ° c , and usually do not survive at temperature above two  zero ° c .
- pron - be find in permanently cold environment such as the deep water of the ocean .
because - pron - be active at low temperature , psychrophile and psychrotroph be important decomposer in cold climate .
organism that grow at optimum temperature of five  zero ° c to a maximum of eight  zero ° c be call thermophile ( " heat loving " ) .
- pron - do not multiply at room temperature .
thermophile be widely distribute in hot spring , geothermal soil , and manmade environment such as garden compost pile where the microbe break down kitchen scrap and vegetal material .
example of thermophile include thermus aquaticus and geobacillus spp .
high up on the extreme temperature scale - pron - find the hyperthermophile , which be characterize by growth range from eight  zero ° c to a maximum of one  one  zero ° c , with some extreme example that survive temperature above one  two  one ° c , the average temperature of an autoclave .
the hydrothermal vent at the bottom of the ocean be a prime example of extreme environment , with temperature reach an estimate three  four  zero ° c ( figure nine  .  two  eight ) .
microbes isolate from the vent achieve optimal growth at temperature high than one  zero  zero ° c .
noteworthy example be pyrobolus and pyrodictium , archaea that grow at one  zero  five ° c and survive autoclave .
figure nine  .  two  nine show the typical skewed curve of temperature - dependent growth for the category of microorganism - pron - have discuss .
figure nine  .  two  eight
a black smoker at the bottom of the ocean belch hot , chemical - rich water , and heat the surround water .
sea vent provide an extreme environment that be nonetheless teem with macroscopic life ( the red tubeworm ) support by an abundant microbial ecosystem .
( credit  noaa )
figure nine  .  two  nine
the graph show growth rate of bacteria as a function of temperature .
notice that the curve be skew toward the optimum temperature .
the skewing of the growth curve be think to reflect the rapid denaturation of protein as the temperature rise past the optimum for growth of the microorganism .
life in extreme environment raise fascinating question about the adaptation of macromolecule and metabolic process .
very low temperature affect cell in many way .
membrane lose - pron - fluidity and be damage by ice crystal formation .
chemical reaction and diffusion slow considerably .
protein become too rigid to catalyze reaction and may undergo denaturation .
at the opposite end of the temperature spectrum , heat denature protein and nucleic acid .
increase fluidity impair metabolic process in membrane .
some of the practical application of the destructive effect of heat on microbe be sterilization by steam , pasteurization , and incineration of inoculate loop .
protein in psychrophile be , in general , rich in hydrophobic residue , display an increase in flexibility , and have a low number of secondary stabilize bond when compare with homologous protein from mesophile .
antifreeze protein and solute that decrease the freezing temperature of the cytoplasm be common .
the lipid in the membrane tend to be unsaturated to increase fluidity .
growth rate be much slow than those encounter at moderate temperature .
under appropriate condition , mesophile and even thermophile can survive freeze .
three  nine  zero chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five liquid culture of bacteria be mix with sterile glycerol solution and freeze to − eight  zero ° c for long - term storage as stock .
culture can withstand freeze dry ( lyophilization ) and then be store as powder in seal ampule to be reconstitute with broth when need .
macromolecule in thermophile and hyperthermophile show some notable structural difference from what be observe in the mesophile .
the ratio of saturate to polyunsaturate lipid increase to limit the fluidity of the cell membrane .
- pron - dna sequence show a high proportion of guanine – cytosine nitrogenous basis , which be hold together by three hydrogen bond in contrast to adenine and thymine , which be connect in the double helix by two hydrogen bond .
additional secondary ionic and covalent bond , as well as the replacement of key amino acid to stabilize folding , contribute to the resistance of protein to denaturation .
the so - call thermoenzyme purify from thermophile have important practical application .
for example , amplification of nucleic acid in the polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) depend on the thermal stability of taq polymerase , an enzyme isolate from t . aquaticus .
degradation enzyme from thermophile be add as ingredient in hot - water detergent , increase - pron - effectiveness .

what temperature requirement do most bacterial human pathogen have ?

what dna adaptation do thermophile exhibit ?
feed the world … and the world 's algae artificial fertilizer have become an important tool in food production around the world .
- pron - be responsible for many of the gain of the so - call green revolution of the two  zero th century , which have allow the planet to feed many of - pron - more than seven billion people .
artificial fertilizer provide nitrogen and phosphorus , key limit nutrient , to crop plant , remove the normal barrier that would otherwise limit the rate of growth .
thus , fertilize crop grow much faster , and farm that use fertilizer produce high crop yield .
however , careless use and overuse of artificial fertilizer have be demonstrate to have significant negative impact on aquatic ecosystem , both freshwater and marine .
fertilizer that be apply at inappropriate time or in too - large quantity allow nitrogen and phosphorus compound to escape use by crop plant and enter drainage system .
inappropriate use of fertilizer in residential setting can also contribute to nutrient load , which find - pron - way to lake and coastal marine ecosystem .
as water warm and nutrient be plentiful , microscopic algae bloom , often change the color of the water because of the high cell density .
most algal bloom be not directly harmful to human or wildlife  however , - pron - can cause harm indirectly .
as the algal population expand and then die , - pron - provide a large increase in organic matter to the bacteria that live in deep water .
with this large supply of nutrient , the population of nonphotosynthetic microorganism explode , consume available oxygen and create " dead zone " where animal life have virtually disappear .
depletion of oxygen in the water be not the only damaging consequence of some algal bloom .
the algae that produce red tide in the gulf of mexico , karenia brevi , secrete potent toxin that can kill fish and other organism and also accumulate in shellfish .
consumption of contaminate shellfish can cause severe neurological and gastrointestinal symptom in human .
shellfish bed must be regularly monitor for the presence of the toxin , and harvest be often shut down when - pron - be present , incur economic cost to the fishery .
cyanobacteria , which can form bloom in marine and freshwater ecosystem , produce toxin call eye on ethics chapter nine
 microbial growth three  nine  one microcystin , which can cause allergic reaction and liver damage when ingest in drinking water or during swimming .
recur cyanobacterial algal bloom in lake erie ( figure nine  .  three  zero ) have force municipality to issue drink water ban for day at a time because of unacceptable toxin level .
this be just a small sampling of the negative consequence of algal bloom , red tide , and dead zone .
yet the benefit of crop fertilizer - the main cause of such bloom - be difficult to dispute .
there be no easy solution to this dilemma , as a ban on fertilizer be not politically or economically feasible .
in lieu of this , - pron - must advocate for responsible use and regulation in agricultural and residential contexts , as well as the restoration of wetland , which can absorb excess fertilizer before - pron - reach lake and ocean .
figure nine  .  three  zero
heavy rain cause runoff of fertilizer into lake erie , trigger extensive algal bloom , which can be observe along the shoreline .
notice the brown unplanted and green plant agricultural land on the shore .
( credit  nasa )
this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two algaebloomvid ) discuss algal bloom and dead zone in more depth .
nine  .  five
other environmental conditions that affect growth learning objectives  identify and describe different category of microbe with specific growth requirement other than oxygen , ph , and temperature , such as alter barometric pressure , osmotic pressure , humidity , and light  give at least one example microorganism for each category of growth requirement microorganisms interact with - pron - environment along more dimension than ph , temperature , and free oxygen level , link to learn three  nine  two chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five although these factor require significant adaptation .
- pron - also find microorganism adapt to vary level of salinity , barometric pressure , humidity , and light .
osmotic and barometric pressure
most natural environment tend to have low solute concentration than the cytoplasm of most microorganism .
rigid cell wall protect the cell from burst in a dilute environment .
not much protection be available against high osmotic pressure .
in this case , water , follow - pron - concentration gradient , flow out of the cell .
this result in plasmolysis ( the shrinking of the protoplasm away from the intact cell wall ) and cell death .
this fact explain why brine and layer meat and fish in salt be time - honor method of preserve food .
microorganisms call halophile ( " salt loving " ) actually require high salt concentration for growth .
these organism be find in marine environment where salt concentration hover at three  .  five % .
extreme halophilic microorganism , such as the red alga dunaliella salina and the archaeal specie halobacterium in figure nine  .  three  one , grow in hypersaline lake such as the great salt lake , which be three  .  five – eight time salty than the ocean , and the dead sea , which be one  zero time salty than the ocean .
figure nine  .  three  one photograph take from space of the great salt lake in utah .
the purple color be cause by high density of the alga dunaliella and the archaean halobacterium spp .
( credit  nasa )
dunaliella spp .
counter the tremendous osmotic pressure of the environment with a high cytoplasmic concentration of glycerol and by actively pump out salt ion .
halobacterium spp .
accumulate large concentration of k+ and other ion in - pron - cytoplasm .
- pron - protein be design for high salt concentration and lose activity at salt concentration below one – two m .
although most halotolerant organism , for example halomonas spp .
in salt marsh , do not need high concentration of salt for growth , - pron - will survive and divide in the presence of high salt .
not surprisingly , the staphylococci , micrococci , and corynebacteria that colonize - pron - skin tolerate salt in - pron - environment .
halotolerant pathogen be an important cause of food - bear illness because - pron - survive and multiply in salty food .
for example , the halotolerant bacteria s . aureus , bacillus cereus , and v . cholerae produce dangerous enterotoxin and be major cause of food poisoning .
microorganism depend on available water to grow .
available moisture be measure as water activity ( aw ) , which be the ratio of the vapor pressure of the medium of interest to the vapor pressure of pure distil water  therefore , the aw of water be equal to one  .  zero .
bacteria require high aw ( zero  .  nine  seven – zero  .  nine  nine ) , whereas fungi can tolerate dry environment  for example , the range of aw for growth of aspergillus spp .
be zero  .  eight – zero  .  seven  five .
decrease the water content of food by dry , as in jerky , or through freeze - drying or by increase osmotic pressure , as in brine and jam , be common method of prevent spoilage .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  nine  three microorganisms that require high atmospheric pressure for growth be call barophile .
the bacteria that live at the bottom of the ocean must be able to withstand great pressure .
because - pron - be difficult to retrieve intact specimen and reproduce such growth condition in the laboratory , the characteristic of these microorganism be largely unknown .
light photoautotrophs , such as cyanobacteria or green sulfur bacteria , and photoheterotroph , such as purple nonsulfur bacteria , depend on sufficient light intensity at the wavelength absorb by - pron - pigment to grow and multiply .
energy from light be capture by pigment and convert into chemical energy that drive carbon fixation and other metabolic process .
the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that be absorb by these organism be define as photosynthetically active radiation ( par ) .
- pron - lie within the visible light spectrum range from four  zero  zero to seven  zero  zero nanometer ( nm ) and extend in the near infrared for some photosynthetic bacteria .
a number of accessory pigment , such as fucoxanthin in brown algae and phycobilin in cyanobacteria , widen the useful range of wavelength for photosynthesis and compensate for the low light level available at great depth of water .
other microorganism , such as the archaea of the class halobacteria , use light energy to drive - pron - proton and sodium pump .
the light be absorb by a pigment protein complex call bacteriorhodopsin , which be similar to the eye pigment rhodopsin .
photosynthetic bacteria be present not only in aquatic environment but also in soil and in symbiosis with fungi in lichen .
the peculiar watermelon snow be cause by a microalga chlamydomonas nivalis , a green alga rich in a secondary red carotenoid pigment ( astaxanthin ) which give the pink hue to the snow where the alga grow .

which photosynthetic pigment be describe in this section ?

what be the fundamental stress of a hypersaline environment for a cell ?
nine  .  six medium use for bacterial growth learning objectives
 identify and describe culture medium for the growth of bacteria , include example of all - purpose medium , enrich , selective , differential , define , and enrichment medium the study of microorganism be greatly facilitate if - pron - be able to culture - pron - , that is , to keep reproduce population alive under laboratory condition .
culture many microorganism be challenge because of highly specific nutritional and environmental requirement and the diversity of these requirement among different specie .
nutritional requirements
the number of available medium to grow bacteria be considerable .
some medium be consider general all - purpose medium and support growth of a large variety of organism .
a prime example of an all - purpose medium be tryptic soy broth ( tsb ) .
specialized medium be use in the identification of bacteria and be supplement with dye , ph indicator , or antibiotic .
one type , enrich medium , contain growth factor , vitamin , and other essential nutrient to promote the growth of fastidious organism , organism that can not make certain nutrient and require - pron - to be add to the medium .
when the complete chemical composition of a medium be know , - pron - be call a chemically define medium .
for example , in ez medium , all individual chemical component be identify and the exact amount of each be know .
in complex medium , which contain extract and digest of yeast , meat , or plant , the precise chemical composition of the medium be not know .
amount of individual component be undetermined and variable .
nutrient broth , tryptic soy broth , and brain heart infusion , be all example of complex medium .
medium that inhibit the growth of unwanted microorganism and support the growth of the organism of interest by three  nine  four chapter nine  microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five supply nutrient and reduce competition be call selective medium .
an example of a selective medium be macconkey agar .
- pron - contain bile salt and crystal violet , which interfere with the growth of many gram - positive bacteria and favor the growth of gram - negative bacteria , particularly the enterobacteriaceae .
these specie be commonly name enteric , reside in the intestine , and be adapt to the presence of bile salt .
the enrichment culture foster the preferential growth of a desire microorganism that represent a fraction of the organism present in an inoculum .
for example , if - pron - want to isolate bacteria that break down crude oil , hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria , sequential subculturing in a medium that supply carbon only in the form of crude oil will enrich the culture with oil - eat bacteria .
the differential medium make - pron - easy to distinguish colony of different bacteria by a change in the color of the colony or the color of the medium .
color change be the result of end product create by interaction of bacterial enzyme with differential substrate in the medium or , in the case of hemolytic reaction , the lysis of red blood cell in the medium .
in figure nine  .  three  two , the differential fermentation of lactose can be observe on macconkey agar .
the lactose fermenter produce acid , which turn the medium and the colony of strong fermenter hot pink .
the medium be supplement with the ph indicator neutral red , which turn to hot pink at low ph .
selective and differential medium can be combine and play an important role in the identification of bacteria by biochemical method .
figure nine  .  three  two
on this macconkey agar plate , the lactose - fermenter e . coli colony be bright pink .
serratia marcescen , which do not ferment lactose , form a cream - color streak on the tan medium .
( credit  american society for microbiology )

distinguish complex and chemically define medium .
 distinguish selective and enrichment medium .
compare the composition of ez medium ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two ezmedium ) and sheep blood ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two bloodagar ) agar .
link to learn chapter nine
 microbial growth three  nine  five
the end - of - year picnic
the microbiology department be celebrate the end of the school year in may by hold - pron - traditional picnic on the green .
the speech drag on for a couple of hour , but finally all the faculty and student can dig into the food  chicken salad , tomato , onion , salad , and custard pie .
by evening , the whole department , except for two vegetarian student who do not eat the chicken salad , be stricken with nausea , vomiting , retching , and abdominal cramping .
several individual complain of diarrhea .
one patient show sign of shock ( low blood pressure ) .
blood and stool sample be collect from patient , and an analysis of all food serve at the meal be conduct .
bacteria can cause gastroenteritis ( inflammation of the stomach and intestinal tract ) either by colonize and replicate in the host , which be consider an infection , or by secrete toxin , which be consider intoxication .
sign and symptom of infection be typically delay , whereas intoxication manifest within hour , as happen after the picnic .
blood sample from the patient show no sign of bacterial infection , which further suggest that this be a case of intoxication .
since intoxication be due to secrete toxin , bacteria be not usually detect in blood or stool sample .
macconkey agar and sorbitol - macconkey agar plate and xylose - lysine - deoxycholate ( xld ) plate be inoculate with stool sample and do not reveal any unusually color colony , and no black colony or white colony be observe on xld .
all lactose fermenter on macconkey agar also ferment sorbitol .
these result rule out common agent of food - bear illness 
e . coli , salmonella spp . , and shigella spp .
analysis of the chicken salad reveal an abnormal number of gram - positive cocci arrange in cluster ( figure nine  .  three  three ) .
a culture of the gram - positive cocci release bubble when mix with hydrogen peroxide .
the culture turn mannitol salt agar yellow after a two  four  - hour incubation .
all the test point to staphylococcus aureus as the organism that secrete the toxin .
sample from the salad show the presence of gram - positive cocci bacteria in cluster .
the colony be positive for catalase .
the bacteria grow on mannitol salt agar fermenting mannitol , as show by the change to yellow of the medium .
the ph indicator in mannitol salt agar be phenol red , which turn to yellow when the medium be acidify by the product of fermentation .
the toxin secrete by s . aureus be know to cause severe gastroenteritis .
the organism be probably introduce into the salad during preparation by the food handler and multiply while the salad be keep in the warm ambient temperature during the speech .

what be some other factor that may have contribute to rapid growth of s . aureus in the chicken salad ?

why would s . aureus not be inhibit by the presence of salt in the chicken salad ?
case in point three  nine  six chapter nine
 microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure nine  .  three  three gram - positive cocci in cluster .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention ) summary nine  .  one
how microbes grow 
most bacterial cell divide by binary fission .
generation time in bacterial growth be define as the double time of the population .

cell in a closed system follow a pattern of growth with four phase  lag , logarithmic ( exponential ) , stationary , and death .

cell can be count by direct viable cell count .
the pour plate and spread plate method be use to plate serial dilution into or onto , respectively , agar to allow counting of viable cell that give rise to colonyforme unit .
membrane filtration be use to count live cell in dilute solution .
the most probable cell number ( mpn ) method allow estimation of cell number in culture without use solid medium .

indirect method can be use to estimate culture density by measure turbidity of a culture or live cell density by measure metabolic activity .

other pattern of cell division include multiple nucleoid formation in cell  asymmetric division , as in budding  and the formation of hypha and terminal spore .

biofilms be community of microorganism enmesh in a matrix of extracellular polymeric substance .
the formation of a biofilm occur when planktonic cell attach to a substrate and become sessile .
cell in biofilm coordinate - pron - activity by communicate through quorum sense .

biofilms be commonly find on surface in nature and in the human body , where - pron - may be beneficial or cause severe infection .
pathogen associate with biofilm be often more resistant to antibiotic and disinfectant .
nine  .  two oxygen requirements for microbial growth

aerobic and anaerobic environment can be find in diverse niche throughout nature , include different site within and on the human body .

microorganism vary in - pron - requirement for molecular oxygen .
obligate aerobe depend on aerobic respiration and use oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor .
- pron - can not grow without oxygen .
 obligate anaerobe can not grow in the presence of oxygen .
- pron - depend on fermentation and anaerobic respiration use a final electron acceptor other than oxygen .

facultative anaerobe show well growth in the presence of oxygen but will also grow without - pron - .
chapter nine
 microbial growth three  nine  seven

although aerotolerant anaerobe do not perform aerobic respiration , - pron - can grow in the presence of oxygen .
most aerotolerant anaerobe test negative for the enzyme catalase .

microaerophiles need oxygen to grow , albeit at a low concentration than two  one % oxygen in air .

optimum oxygen concentration for an organism be the oxygen level that promote the fast growth rate .
the minimum permissive oxygen concentration and the maximum permissive oxygen concentration be , respectively , the low and the high oxygen level that the organism will tolerate .

peroxidase , superoxide dismutase , and catalase be the main enzyme involve in the detoxification of the reactive oxygen specie .
superoxide dismutase be usually present in a cell that can tolerate oxygen .
all three enzyme be usually detectable in cell that perform aerobic respiration and produce more ros .

a capnophile be an organism that require a high than atmospheric concentration of co two to grow .
nine  .  three
the effect of ph on microbial growth 
bacteria be generally neutrophile .
- pron - grow good at neutral ph close to seven  .  zero .

acidophile grow optimally at a ph near three  .  zero .
alkaliphile be organism that grow optimally between a ph of eight and one  zero  .  five .
extreme acidophile and alkaliphile grow slowly or not at all near neutral ph .

microorganism grow good at - pron - optimum growth ph .
growth occur slowly or not at all below the minimum growth ph and above the maximum growth ph .
nine  .  four temperature and microbial growth  microorganisms thrive at a wide range of temperature  - pron - have colonize different natural environment and have adapt to extreme temperature .
both extreme cold and hot temperature require evolutionary adjustment to macromolecule and biological process .

psychrophile grow good in the temperature range of zero – one  five ° c whereas psychrotroph thrive between four ° c and two  five ° c .

mesophile grow good at moderate temperature in the range of two  zero ° c to about four  five ° c .
pathogen be usually mesophile .

thermophiles and hyperthemophile be adapt to life at temperature above five  zero ° c .

adaptation to cold and hot temperature require change in the composition of membrane lipid and protein .
nine  .  five other environmental conditions that affect growth  halophiles require high salt concentration in the medium , whereas halotolerant organism can grow and multiply in the presence of high salt but do not require - pron - for growth .

halotolerant pathogen be an important source of foodborne illness because - pron - contaminate food preserve in salt .
 photosynthetic bacteria depend on visible light for energy .

most bacteria , with few exception , require high moisture to grow .
nine  .  six medium use for bacterial growth 
chemically define medium contain only chemically know component .
 selective medium favor the growth of some microorganism while inhibit other .

enrich medium contain add essential nutrient a specific organism need to grow  differential medium help distinguish bacteria by the color of the colony or the change in the medium .
chapter one  zero biochemistry of the genome figure one  zero  .  one sibling within a family share some gene with each other and with each parent .
identical twin , however , be genetically identical .
bacteria like escherichia coli may acquire gene encode virulence factor , convert - pron - into pathogenic strain , like this uropathogenic e . coli .
( credit leave  modification of work by pellegrini c , fargnoli mc , suppa m , peris k  credit right 
modification of work by american society for microbiology )
chapter outline one  zero  .  one
use microbiology to discover the secrets of life one  zero  .  two structure and function of dna one  zero  .  three structure and function of rna one  zero  .  four structure and function of cellular genomes introduction children inherit some characteristic from each parent .
sibling typically look similar to each other , but not exactly the same - except in the case of identical twin .
how can - pron - explain these phenomenon ?
the answer lie in heredity ( the transmission of trait from one generation to the next ) and genetic ( the science of heredity ) .
because human reproduce sexually , five  zero % of a child 's gene come from the mother 's egg cell and the remain five  zero % from the father 's sperm cell .
sperm and egg be form through the process of meiosis , where dna recombination occur .
thus , there be no predictable pattern as to which five  zero % come from which parent .
thus , sibling have only some gene , and - pron - associate characteristic , in common .
identical twin be the exception , because - pron - be genetically identical .
genetic difference among related microbe also dictate many observed biochemical and virulence difference .
for example , some strain of the bacterium escherichia coli be harmless member of the normal microbiota in the human gastrointestinal tract .
other strain of the same specie have gene that give - pron - the ability to cause disease .
in bacteria , such gene be not inherit via sexual reproduction , as in human .
often , - pron - be transfer via plasmid , small circular piece of double - strand dna that can be exchange between prokaryote .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  zero  five one  zero  .  one use microbiology to discover the secrets of life
learning objectives
 describe the discovery of nucleic acid and nucleotide 
explain the historical experiment that lead to the characterization of dna
 describe how microbiology and microorganism have be use to discover the biochemistry of gene 
explain how scientist establish the link between dna and heredity through the early two  zero th century , dna be not yet recognize as the genetic material responsible for heredity , the passage of trait from one generation to the next .
in fact , much of the research be dismiss until the mid -  two  zero th century .
the scientific community believe , incorrectly , that the process of inheritance involve a blending of parental trait that produce an intermediate physical appearance in offspring  this hypothetical process appear to be correct because of what - pron - know now as continuous variation , which result from the action of many gene to determine a particular characteristic , like human height .
offspring appear to be a " blend " of - pron - parent ' trait when - pron - look at characteristic that exhibit continuous variation .
the blending theory of inheritance assert that the original parental trait be lose or absorb by the blending in the offspring , but - pron - now know that this be not the case .
two separate line of research , begin in the mid to late one  eight  zero  zero , ultimately lead to the discovery and characterization of dna and the foundation of genetic , the science of heredity .
these line of research begin to converge in the one  nine  two  zero , and research use microbial system ultimately result in significant contribution to elucidate the molecular basis of genetic .
discovery and characterization of dna modern understanding of dna have evolve from the discovery of nucleic acid to the development of the doublehelix model .
in the one  eight  six  zero , friedrich miescher ( one  eight  four  four – one  eight  nine  five ) , a physician by profession , be the first person to isolate phosphorus - rich chemical from leukocyte ( white blood cell ) from the pus on use bandage from a local surgical clinic .
- pron - name these chemical ( which would eventually be know as rna and dna )
“ nuclein " because - pron - be isolate from the nucleus of the cell .
- pron - student richard altmann ( one  eight  five  two – one  nine  zero  zero ) subsequently term - pron - “
nucleic acid "
two  zero year later when - pron - discover the acidic nature of nuclein .
in the last two decade of the one  nine th century , german biochemist albrecht kossel ( one  eight  five  three – one  nine  two  seven ) isolate and characterize the five different nucleotide basis compose nucleic acid .
these be adenine , guanine , cytosine , thymine ( in dna ) , and uracil ( in rna ) .
kossell receive the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in one  nine  one  zero for - pron - work on nucleic acid and for - pron - considerable work on protein , include the discovery of histidine .
part one alex be a two  two  - year - old college student who vacation in puerta vallarta , mexico , for spring break .
unfortunately , two day after fly home to ohio , - pron - begin to experience abdominal cramping and extensive watery diarrhea .
because of - pron - discomfort , - pron - seek medical attention at a large cincinnati hospital nearby .

what type of infection or other condition may be responsible ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus four  zero  six chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five foundations of genetics despite the discovery of dna in the late one  eight  zero  zero , scientist do not make the association with heredity for many more decade .
to make this connection , scientist , include a number of microbiologist , perform many experiment on plant , animal , and bacteria .
mendel 's pea plants while miescher be isolate and discover dna in the one  eight  six  zero , austrian monk and botanist johann gregor mendel ( one  eight  two  two – one  eight  eight  four ) be experiment with garden pea , demonstrate and document basic pattern of inheritance , now know as mendel 's law .
in one  eight  five  six , mendel begin - pron - decade - long research into inheritance pattern .
- pron - use the diploid garden pea , pisum sativum , as - pron - primary model system because - pron - naturally self - fertilize and be highly inbred , produce " truebreede ” pea plant line - plant that always produce offspring that look like the parent .
by experiment with true - breed pea plant , mendel avoid the appearance of unexpected trait in offspring that may occur if - pron - use plant that be not true - breeding .
mendel perform hybridization , which involve mate two true - breed individual ( p generation ) that have different trait , and examine the characteristic of - pron - offspring ( first filial generation , f one ) as well as the offspring of self - fertilization of the f one generation ( second filial generation , f two )
( figure one  zero  .  two ) .
figure one  zero  .  two
in one of - pron - experiment on inheritance pattern , mendel cross plant that be true - breeding for violet flower color with plant true - breeding for white flower color ( the p generation ) .
the result hybrid in the f one generation all have violet flower .
in the f two generation , approximately three - quarter of the plant have violet flower , and one - quarter have white flower .
in one  eight  six  five , mendel present the result of - pron - experiment with nearly three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero pea plant to the local natural history society .
- pron - demonstrate that trait be transmit faithfully from parent to offspre independently of other trait .
in one  eight  six  six , - pron - publish - pron - work , “ experiments in plant hybridization , ”[ one ] in the proceedings of the natural history society of brünn .
mendel 's work go virtually unnoticed by the scientific community , which believe , incorrectly , in the theory of blending of trait in continuous variation .
- pron - be not recognize for - pron - extraordinary scientific contribution during - pron - lifetime .
in fact , - pron - be not until one  nine  zero  zero that - pron - work be rediscover , reproduce , and revitalize by scientist on the brink of discover the chromosomal basis of heredity .
one .
j . g . mendel .
“
versuche über pflanzenhybriden .
" verhandlungen des naturforschenden vereines in brünn , bd .
abhandlungen four ( one  eight  six  five  )  three – seven .
( for english translation , see http / / www . mendelweb . org / mendel . plain . html )
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  zero  seven
the chromosomal theory of inheritance mendel carry out - pron - experiment long before chromosome be visualize under a microscope .
however , with the improvement of microscopic technique during the late one  eight  zero  zero , cell biologist could stain and visualize subcellular structure with dye and observe - pron - action during meiosis .
- pron - be able to observe chromosome replicate , condense from an amorphous nuclear mass into distinct x - shaped body and migrate to separate cellular pole .
the speculation that chromosome may be the key to understand heredity lead several scientist to examine mendel 's publication and re - evaluate - pron - model in term of the behavior of chromosome during mitosis and meiosis .
in one  nine  zero  two , theodor boveri ( one  eight  six  two – one  nine  one  five ) observe that in sea urchin , nuclear component ( chromosome ) determine proper embryonic development .
that same year , walter sutton ( one  eight  seven  seven – one  nine  one  six ) observe the separation of chromosome into daughter cell during meiosis .
together , these observation lead to the development of the chromosomal theory of inheritance , which identify chromosome as the genetic material responsible for mendelian inheritance .
despite compelling correlation between the behavior of chromosome during meiosis and mendel 's observation , the chromosomal theory of inheritance be propose long before there be any direct evidence that trait be carry on chromosome .
thomas hunt morgan ( one  eight  six  six – one  nine  four  five ) and - pron - colleague spend several year carry out cross with the fruit fly , drosophila melanogaster .
- pron - perform meticulous microscopic observation of fly chromosome and correlate these observation with result fly characteristic .
- pron - work provide the first experimental evidence to support the chromosomal theory of inheritance in the early one  nine  zero  zero .
in one  nine  one  five , morgan and - pron - “
fly room
" colleague publish the mechanism of mendelian heredity , which identify chromosome as the cellular structure responsible for heredity .
for - pron - many significant contribution to genetic , morgan receive the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in one  nine  three  three .
in the late one  nine  two  zero , barbara mcclintock ( one  nine  zero  two – one  nine  nine  two ) develop chromosomal staining technique to visualize and differentiate between the different chromosome of maize ( corn ) .
in the one  nine  four  zero and one  nine  five  zero , - pron - identify a breakage event on chromosome nine , which - pron - name the dissociation locus ( ds ) .
ds could change position within the chromosome .
- pron - also identify an activator locus ( ac ) .
ds chromosome breakage could be activate by an ac element ( transposase enzyme ) .
at first , mcclintock 's finding of these jump gene , which - pron - now call transposon , be not accept by the scientific community .
- pron - be not until the one  nine  six  zero and later that transposon be discover in bacteriophage , bacteria , and drosophila .
today , - pron - know that transposon be mobile segment of dna that can move within the genome of an organism .
- pron - can regulate gene expression , protein expression , and virulence ( ability to cause disease ) .
microbes and viruses in genetic research microbiologists have also play a crucial part in - pron - understanding of genetic .
experimental organism such as mendel 's garden pea , morgan 's fruit fly , and mcclintock 's corn have already be use successfully to pave the way for an understanding of genetic .
however , microbe and virus be ( and still be ) excellent model system for the study of genetic because , unlike pea , fruit fly , and corn , - pron - be propagate more easily in the laboratory , grow to high population density in a small amount of space and in a short time .
in addition , because of - pron - structural simplicity , microbe and virus be more readily manipulate genetically .
fortunately , despite significant difference in size , structure , reproduction strategy , and other biological characteristic , there be biochemical unity among all organism  - pron - have in common the same underlie molecule responsible for heredity and the use of genetic material to give cell - pron - vary characteristic .
in the word of french scientist jacques monod , “ what be true for e . coli be also true for the elephant , " mean that the biochemistry of life have be maintain throughout evolution and be share in all form of life , from simple unicellular organism to large , complex organism .
this biochemical continuity make microbe excellent model to use for genetic study .
in a clever set of experiment in the one  nine  three  zero and one  nine  four  zero , german scientist joachim hämmerling ( one  nine  zero  one – one  nine  eight  zero ) , use the single - celle alga acetabularia as a microbial model , establish that the genetic information in a eukaryotic cell be house within the nucleus .
acetabularia spp . be unusually large algal cell that grow asymmetrically , form a " foot " contain the nucleus , which be use for substrate attachment  a stalk  and an umbrella - like cap - structure that can all be easily see with the naked eye .
in an early set of experiment , hämmerling remove either the cap or four  zero  eight chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the foot of the cell and observe whether new cap or foot be regenerate ( figure one  zero  .  three ) .
- pron - find that when the foot of these cell be remove , new foot do not grow  however , when cap be remove from the cell , new cap be regenerate .
this suggest that the hereditary information be locate in the nucleus - contain foot of each cell .
figure one  zero  .  three ( a )
the cell of the single - celle alga acetabularia measure two – six cm and have a cell morphology that can be observe with the naked eye .
each cell have a cap , a stalk , and a foot , which contain the nucleus .
( b )
hämmerling find that if - pron - remove the cap , a new cap would regenerate  but if - pron - remove the foot , a new foot would not regenerate .
- pron - conclude that the genetic information need for regeneration be find in the nucleus .
( credit a  modification of work by james st . john )
in another set of experiment , hämmerling use two specie of acetabularia that have different cap morphology , a . chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  zero  nine crenulata and a . mediterranea ( figure one  zero  .  four ) .
- pron - cut the cap from both type of cell and then graft the stalk from an a . crenulata onto an a . mediterranea foot , and vice versa .
over time , - pron - observe that the graft cell with the a . crenulata foot and a . mediterranea stalk develop a cap with the a . crenulata morphology .
conversely , the graft cell with the a . mediterranea foot and a . crenulata stalk develop a cap with the a . mediterranea morphology .
- pron - microscopically confirm the presence of nucleus in the foot of these cell and attribute the development of these cap morphology to the nucleus of each graft cell .
thus , - pron - show experimentally that the nucleus be the location of genetic material that dictate a cell 's property .
figure one  zero  .  four
in a second set of experiment , hämmerling use two morphologically different specie and graft stalk from each specie to the foot of the other .
- pron - find that the property of the regenerated cap be dictate by the specie of the nucleus - contain foot .
another microbial model , the red bread mold neurospora crassa , be use by george beadle and edward tatum to demonstrate the relationship between gene and the protein - pron - encode .
beadle have work with fruit fly in morgan 's laboratory but find - pron - too complex to perform certain type of experiment .
n . crassa , on the other hand , be a simple organism and have the ability to grow on a minimal medium because - pron - contain enzymatic pathway that allow - pron - to use the medium to produce - pron - own vitamin and amino acid .
beadle and tatum irradiate the mold with x - ray to induce change to a sequence of nucleic acid , call mutation .
- pron - mate the irradiated mold spore and attempt to grow - pron - on both a complete medium and a minimal medium .
- pron - look for mutant that grow on a complete medium , supplement with vitamin and amino acid , but do not grow on the minimal medium lack these supplement .
such mold theoretically contain mutation in the gene that encode biosynthetic pathway .
upon find such mutant , - pron - systematically test each to determine which vitamin or amino acid
- pron - be unable to produce ( figure one  zero  .  five ) and publish this work in one  nine  four  one  . [ two ] four  one  zero chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  zero  .  five
beadle and tatum 's experiment involve the mating of irradiated and nonirradiated mold spore .
these spore be grow on both complete medium and a minimal medium to determine which amino acid or vitamin the mutant be unable to produce on - pron - own .
subsequent work by beadle , tatum , and colleague show that - pron - could isolate different class of mutant that require a particular supplement , like the amino acid arginine
( figure one  zero  .  six ) .
with some knowledge of the arginine biosynthesis pathway , - pron - identify three class of arginine mutant by supplement the minimal medium with intermediate ( citrulline or ornithine ) in the pathway .
the three mutant differ in - pron - ability to grow in each of the medium , which lead the group of scientist to propose , in one  nine  four  five , that each type of mutant have a defect in a different gene in the arginine biosynthesis pathway .
this lead to the so - call one gene – one enzyme hypothesis , which suggest that each gene encode one enzyme .
subsequent knowledge about the process of transcription and translation lead scientist to revise this to the " one gene – one polypeptide " hypothesis .
although there be some gene that do not encode polypeptide ( but rather encode for transfer rna [ trnas ] or ribosomal rnas [ rrnas ] , which - pron - will discuss later ) , the one gene – one enzyme hypothesis be true in many case , especially in microbe .
beadle and tatum 's discovery of the link between gene and correspond characteristic earn - pron - the one  nine  five  eight nobel prize in physiology and medicine and have since become the basis for modern molecular genetic .
two .
g . w . beadle , e . l . tatum .
“ genetic control of biochemical reactions in neurospora .
"
proceedings of the national academy of sciences two  seven
no .
one  one ( one  nine  four  one  )  four  nine  nine – five  zero  six .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  one  one figure one  zero  .  six three class of arginine mutant be identify , each differ in - pron - ability to grow in the presence of intermediate in the arginine biosynthesis pathway .
from this , beadle and tatum conclude that each mutant be defective in a different gene encode a different enzyme in the arginine biosynthesis pathway , lead to - pron - to - pron - one gene – one enzyme hypothesis .
to learn more about the experiment of beadle and tatum , visit this website ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two expbeatatum ) from the dna learning center .

what organism do morgan and - pron - colleague use to develop the chromosomal theory of inheritance ?
what trait do - pron - track ?

what do hämmerling prove with - pron - experiment on acetabularia ?
link to learn four  one  two chapter one  zero
 biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five dna as the molecule responsible for heredity by the beginning of the two  zero th century , a great deal of work have already be do on characterize dna and establish the foundation of genetic , include attribute heredity to chromosome find within the nucleus .
despite all of this research , - pron - be not until well into the two  zero th century that these line of research converge and scientist begin to consider that dna could be the genetic material that offspring inherit from - pron - parent .
dna , contain only four different nucleotide , be think to be structurally too simple to encode such complex genetic information .
instead , protein be think to have the complexity require to serve as cellular genetic information because - pron - be compose of two  zero different amino acid that could be combine in a huge variety of combination .
microbiologist play a pivotal role in the research that determine that dna be the molecule responsible for heredity .
griffith 's transformation experiment british bacteriologist frederick griffith ( one  eight  seven  nine – one  nine  four  one ) be perhaps the first person to show that hereditary information could be transfer from one cell to another “ horizontally
" ( between member of the same generation ) , rather than “ vertically " ( from parent to offspring ) .
in one  nine  two  eight , - pron - report the first demonstration of bacterial transformation , a process in which external dna be take up by a cell , thereby change - pron - characteristics . [ three ]
- pron - be work with two strain of streptococcus pneumoniae , a bacterium that cause pneumonia  a rough ( r ) strain and a smooth ( s ) strain .
the r strain be nonpathogenic and lack a capsule on - pron - outer surface  as a result , colony from the r strain appear rough when grow on plate .
the s strain be pathogenic and have a capsule outside - pron - cell wall , allow - pron - to escape phagocytosis by the host immune system .
the capsule cause colony from the s strain to appear smooth when grow on plate .
in a series of experiment , griffith analyze the effect of live r , live s , and heat - kill s strain of s . pneumoniae on live mouse ( figure one  zero  .  seven ) .
when mouse be inject with the live s strain , the mouse die .
when - pron - inject the mouse with the live r strain or the heat - kill s strain , the mouse survive .
but when - pron - inject the mouse with a mixture of live r strain and heat - kill s strain , the mouse die .
upon isolate the live bacteria from the dead mouse , - pron - only recover the s strain of bacteria .
when - pron - then inject this isolate s strain into fresh mouse , the mouse die .
griffith conclude that something have pass from the heat - kill s strain into the live r strain and “ transform " - pron - into the pathogenic s strain  - pron - call this the “ transform principle .
"
these experiment be now famously know as griffith 's transformation experiment .
three .
f . griffith .
"
the significance of pneumococcal types .
" journal of hygiene two  seven
no .
two
( one  nine  two  eight  )  eight – one  five  nine .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  one  three figure one  zero  .  seven
in - pron - famous series of experiment , griffith use two strain of s . pneumoniae .
the s strain be pathogenic and cause death .
mouse inject with the nonpathogenic r strain or the heat - kill s strain survive .
however , a combination of the heat - kill s strain and the live r strain cause the mouse to die .
the s strain recover from the dead mouse show that something have pass from the heat - kill s strain to the r strain , transform the r strain into an s strain in the process .
in one  nine  four  four , oswald avery , colin macleod , and maclyn mccarty be interested in explore griffith 's transform principle further .
- pron - isolate the s strain from infect dead mouse , heat - kill - pron - , and inactivate various component of the s extract , conduct a systematic elimination study ( figure one  zero  .  eight ) .
- pron - use enzyme that specifically degrade protein , rna , and dna and mix the s extract with each of these individual enzyme .
then , - pron - test each extract / enzyme combination 's result ability to transform the r strain , as observe by the diffuse growth of the s strain in culture medium and confirm visually by growth on plate .
- pron - find that when dna be degrade , the result mixture be no longer able to transform the r strain bacteria , whereas no other enzymatic treatment be able to prevent transformation .
this lead - pron - to conclude that dna be the transform principle .
despite - pron - result , many scientist do not accept - pron - conclusion , instead believe that there be protein contaminant within - pron - extract .
four  one  four chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  zero  .  eight
oswald avery , colin macleod , and maclyn mccarty follow up on griffith 's experiment and experimentally determine that the transform principle be dna .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  one  five

how do avery , macleod , and mccarty 's experiment show that dna be the transform principle first describe by griffith ?
hershey and chase 's proof of dna as genetic material alfred hershey and martha chase perform - pron - own experiment in one  nine  five  two and be able to provide confirmatory evidence that dna , not protein , be the genetic material ( figure one  zero  .  nine  ) . [ four ]
hershey and chase be study a bacteriophage , a virus that infect bacteria .
virus typically have a simple structure  a protein coat , call the capsid , and a nucleic acid core that contain the genetic material , either dna or rna ( see viruses ) .
the particular bacteriophage - pron - be study be the t two bacteriophage , which infect e . coli cell .
as - pron - now know today , t two attache to the surface of the bacterial cell
and then - pron - inject - pron - nucleic acid inside the cell .
the phage dna make multiple copy of - pron - use the host machinery , and eventually the host cell burst , release a large number of bacteriophage .
hershey and chase label the protein coat in one batch of phage use radioactive sulfur , three  five s , because sulfur be find in the amino acid methionine and cysteine but not in nucleic acid .
- pron - label the dna in another batch use radioactive phosphorus , three  two p , because phosphorus be find in dna and rna but not typically in protein .
each batch of phage be allow to infect the cell separately .
after infection , hershey and chase put each phage bacterial suspension in a blender , which detach the phage coat from the host cell , and spin down the result suspension in a centrifuge .
the heavy bacterial cell settle down and form a pellet , whereas the light phage particle stay in the supernatant .
in the tube with the protein label , the radioactivity remain only in the supernatant .
in the tube with the dna label , the radioactivity be detect only in the bacterial cell .
hershey and chase conclude that - pron - be the phage dna that be inject into the cell that carry the information to produce more phage particle , thus prove that dna , not protein , be the source of the genetic material .
as a result of - pron - work , the scientific community more broadly accept dna as the molecule responsible for heredity .
four .
a . d . hershey , m . chase .
“
independent functions of viral protein and nucleic acid in growth of bacteriophage .
" journal of general physiology three  six
no .
one ( one  nine  five  two  )  three  nine – five  six .
four  one  six chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  zero  .  nine martha chase and alfred hershey conduct an experiment separately label the dna and protein of the t two bacteriophage to determine which component be the genetic material responsible for the production of new phage particle .
by the time hershey and chase publish - pron - experiment in the early one  nine  five  zero , microbiologist and other scientist have be research heredity for over eight  zero year .
build on one another 's research during that time culminate in the general agreement that dna be the genetic material responsible for heredity ( figure one  zero  .  one  zero ) .
this knowledge set the stage for the age of molecular biology to come and the significant advancement in biotechnology and system biology that - pron - be experience today .
to learn more about the experiment involve in the history of genetic and the discovery of dna as the genetic material of cell , visit this website ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two dnalearncen ) from the dna learning center .

how do hershey and chase use microbe to prove that dna be genetic material ?
link to learning chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  one  seven figure one  zero  .  one  zero
a timeline of key event lead up to the identification of dna as the molecule responsible for heredity one  zero  .  two structure and function of dna learning objectives
 describe the biochemical structure of deoxyribonucleotide 
identify the base pair use in the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotide
 explain why the double helix of dna be describe as antiparallel
in microbial metabolism , - pron - discuss three class of macromolecule  protein , lipid , and carbohydrate .
in this chapter , - pron - will discuss a fourth class of macromolecule  nucleic acid .
like other macromolecule , nucleic acid be compose of monomer , call nucleotide , which be polymerize to form large strand .
each nucleic acid strand contain certain nucleotide that appear in a certain order within the strand , call - pron - base sequence .
the base sequence of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) be responsible for carry and retain the hereditary information in a cell .
in mechanisms of microbial genetics , - pron - will discuss in detail the way in which dna use - pron - own base sequence to direct - pron - own synthesis , as well as the synthesis of rna and protein , which , in turn , give rise to product with diverse structure and function .
in this section , - pron - will discuss the basic structure and function of dna .
dna nucleotides
the building block of nucleic acid be nucleotide .
nucleotide that compose dna be call deoxyribonucleotide .
the three component of a deoxyribonucleotide be a five - carbon sugar call deoxyribose , a phosphate group , and a nitrogenous base , a nitrogen - contain ring structure that be responsible for complementary base pair between nucleic acid strand ( figure one  zero  .  one  one ) .
the carbon atom of the five - carbon deoxyribose be number one ʹ , two ʹ , three ʹ , four ʹ , and five ʹ ( one ʹ be read as “ one prime " ) .
a nucleoside comprise the five - carbon sugar and four  one  eight chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five nitrogenous base .
figure one  zero  .  one  one
( a )
each deoxyribonucleotide be make up of a sugar call deoxyribose , a phosphate group , and a nitrogenous base - in this case , adenine .
( b )
the five carbon within deoxyribose be designate as one ʹ , two ʹ , three ʹ , four ʹ , and five ʹ .
the deoxyribonucleotide be name accord to the nitrogenous basis ( figure one  zero  .  one  two ) .
the nitrogenous basis adenine ( a ) and guanine ( g ) be the purine  - pron - have a double - ring structure with a six - carbon ring fuse to a five - carbon ring .
the pyrimidine , cytosine ( c ) and thymine ( t ) , be small nitrogenous basis that have only a sixcarbon ring structure .
figure one  zero  .  one  two nitrogenous basis within dna be categorize into the two - ringed purine adenine and guanine and the single - ringed pyrimidine cytosine and thymine .
thymine be unique to dna .
individual nucleoside triphosphate combine with each other by covalent bond know as five ʹ -  three ʹ phosphodiest bond , or linkage
whereby the phosphate group attach to the five ʹ carbon of the sugar of one nucleotide bond to the hydroxyl group of the three ʹ carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide .
phosphodiester bonding between nucleotide form the sugar - phosphate backbone , the alternate sugar - phosphate structure compose the framework of a nucleic acid strand ( figure one  zero  .  one  three ) .
during the polymerization process , deoxynucleotide triphosphate ( dntp ) be use .
to construct the sugar - phosphate backbone , the two terminal phosphate be release from the dntp as a pyrophosphate .
the result strand of nucleic acid have a free phosphate group at the five ʹ carbon end and a free hydroxyl group at the three ʹ carbon end .
the two unused phosphate group from the nucleotide triphosphate be release as pyrophosphate during phosphodiest bond formation .
pyrophosphate be subsequently hydrolyze , release the energy use to drive nucleotide polymerization .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  one  nine figure one  zero  .  one  three phosphodiester bond form between the phosphate group attach to the five ʹ carbon of one nucleotide and the hydroxyl group of the three ʹ carbon in the next nucleotide , bring about polymerization of nucleotide in to nucleic acid strand .
note the five ʹ and three ʹ end of this nucleic acid strand .

what be mean by the five ʹ and three ʹ end of a nucleic acid strand ?
discover the double helix by the early one  nine  five  zero s , considerable evidence have accumulate indicate that dna be the genetic material of cell , and now the race be on to discover - pron - three - dimensional structure .
around this time , austrian biochemist erwin chargaff[ five ]
( one  nine  zero  five – two  zero  zero  two ) examine the content of dna in different specie and discover that adenine , thymine , guanine , and cytosine be not find in equal quantity , and that - pron - vary from specie to specie , but not between individual of the same specie .
- pron - find that the amount of adenine be very close to equal the amount of thymine , and the amount of cytosine be very close to equal the amount of guanine , or a = t and g = c .
these relationship be also know as chargaff 's rule .
other scientist be also actively explore this field during the mid -  two  zero th century .
in one  nine  five  two , american scientist linus pauling ( one  nine  zero  one – one  nine  nine  four ) be the world
's lead structural chemist and odd - on favorite to solve the structure of dna .
pauling have earlier discover the structure of protein α helix , use x - ray diffraction , and , base upon x - ray diffraction image of dna make in - pron - laboratory , - pron - propose a triple - strand model of dna . [ six ]
at the same time , five .
n . kresge et al .
“
chargaff ' s rule  the work of erwin chargaff .
" journal of biological chemistry two  eight  zero ( two  zero  zero  five  ) e two  one .
four  two  zero chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five british researcher rosalind franklin ( one  nine  two  zero – one  nine  five  eight ) and - pron - graduate student r . g . gosling be also use x - ray diffraction to understand the structure of dna ( figure one  zero  .  one  four ) .
- pron - be franklin 's scientific expertise that result in the production of more well - define x - ray diffraction image of dna that would clearly show the overall doublehelix structure of dna .
figure one  zero  .  one  four
the x - ray diffraction pattern of dna show - pron - helical nature .
( credit  national institutes of health )
james watson ( one  nine  two  eight – ) , an american scientist , and francis crick ( one  nine  one  six – two  zero  zero  four ) , a british scientist , be work together in the one  nine  five  zero to discover dna 's structure .
- pron - use chargaff 's rule and franklin and wilkins ' x - ray diffraction image of dna fiber to piece together the purine - pyrimidine pairing of the double helical dna molecule ( figure one  zero  .  one  five ) .
in april one  nine  five  three , watson and crick publish - pron - model of the dna double helix in nature . [ seven ]
the same issue additionally include paper by wilkins and colleagues , [ eight ] as well as by franklin and gosling , [ nine ] each describe different aspect of the molecular structure of dna .
in one  nine  six  two , james watson , francis crick , and maurice wilkins be award the nobel prize in physiology and medicine .
unfortunately , by then franklin have die , and nobel prize at the time be not award posthumously .
work continue , however , on learn about the structure of dna .
in one  nine  seven  three , alexander rich ( one  nine  two  four – two  zero  one  five ) and colleague be able to analyze dna crystal to confirm and further elucidate dna structure . [ one  zero ] six .
l . pauling , “ a propose structure for the nucleic acids .
”
proceedings of the national academy of science of the united states of america three  nine
no .
two ( one  nine  five  three  )  eight  four – nine  seven .
seven .
j . d . watson , f . h . c . crick .
“
a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid .
"
nature one  seven  one
no .
four  three  five  six
( one  nine  five  three  )  seven  three  seven – seven  three  eight .
eight .
m . h . f . wilkins et al .
"
molecular structure of deoxypentose nucleic acids .
"
nature one  seven  one
no .
four  three  five  six
( one  nine  five  three  )  seven  three  eight – seven  four  zero . nine .
r . franklin , r . g . gosling .
" molecular configuration in sodium thymonucleate .
"
nature one  seven  one
no .
four  three  five  six
( one  nine  five  three  )  seven  four  zero – seven  four  one .
one  zero .
r . o .
day et al .
“
a crystalline fragment of the double helix  the structure of the dinucleoside phosphate guanylyl -  three  ' ,  five  ' - cytidine .
"
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america seven  zero
no .
three
( one  nine  seven  three  )  eight  four  nine – eight  five  three .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  two  one figure one  zero  .  one  five
in one  nine  five  three , james watson and francis crick build this model of the structure of dna , show here on display at the science museum in london .

which scientist be give most of the credit for describe the molecular structure of dna ?
dna structure watson and crick propose that dna be make up of two strand that be twist around each other to form a righthande helix .
the two dna strand be antiparallel , such that the three ʹ end of one strand face the five ʹ end of the other ( figure one  zero  .  one  six ) .
the three ʹ end of each strand have a free hydroxyl group , while the five ʹ end of each strand have a free phosphate group .
the sugar and phosphate of the polymerized nucleotide form the backbone of the structure , whereas the nitrogenous basis be stack inside .
these nitrogenous basis on the interior of the molecule interact with each other , base pairing .
analysis of the diffraction pattern of dna have determine that there be approximately one  zero basis per turn in dna .
the asymmetrical spacing of the sugar - phosphate backbone generate major groove ( where the backbone be far apart ) and minor groove ( where the backbone be close together )
( figure one  zero  .  one  six ) .
these groove be location where protein can bind to dna .
the binding of these protein can alter the structure of dna , regulate replication , or regulate transcription of dna into rna .
four  two  two chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
one  zero  .  one  six watson and crick propose the double helix model for dna .
( a )
the sugar - phosphate backbone be on the outside of the double helix and purine and pyrimidine form the “ rung " of the dna helix ladder .
( b )
the two dna strand be antiparallel to each other .
( c )
the direction of each strand be identify by number the carbon ( one through five ) in each sugar molecule .
the five ʹ end be the one where carbon # five be not bind to another nucleotide  the three ʹ end be the one where carbon # three be not bind to another nucleotide .
base pairing take place between a purine and pyrimidine .
in dna , adenine ( a ) and thymine ( t ) be complementary base pair , and cytosine ( c ) and guanine ( g ) be also complementary base pair , explain chargaff 's rule ( figure one  zero  .  one  seven ) .
the base pair be stabilize by hydrogen bond  adenine and thymine form two hydrogen bond between - pron - , whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bond between - pron - .
figure one  zero  .  one  seven hydrogen bond form between complementary nitrogenous basis on the interior of dna .
in the laboratory , expose the two dna strand of the double helix to high temperature or to certain chemical can break the hydrogen bond between complementary basis , thus separate the strand into two separate single strand of dna ( single - strand dna [ ssdna ] ) .
this process be call dna denaturation and be analogous to protein denaturation , as describe in proteins .
the ssdna strand can also be put back together as double - strand dna ( dsdna ) , through reannealing or renature by cool or remove the chemical denaturant , allow these chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  two  three hydrogen bond to reform .
the ability to artificially manipulate dna in this way be the basis for several important technique in biotechnology ( figure one  zero  .  one  eight ) .
because of the additional hydrogen bonding between the c = g base pair , dna with a high gc content be more difficult to denature than dna with a low gc content .
figure one  zero  .  one  eight
in the laboratory , the double helix can be denature to single - strand dna through exposure to heat or chemical , and then renature through cooling or removal of chemical denaturant to allow the dna strand to reanneal .
( credit 
modification of work by hernández - lemus e , nicasio - collazo la , castañeda - priego r ) view an animation ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two dnastruanim ) on dna structure from the dna learning center to learn more .

what be the two complementary base pair of dna and how be - pron - bond together ?
dna function dna store the information need to build and control the cell .
the transmission of this information from mother to daughter cell be call vertical gene transfer and - pron - occur through the process of dna replication .
dna be replicate when a cell make a duplicate copy of - pron - dna , then the cell divide , result in the correct distribution of one dna copy to each result cell .
dna can also be enzymatically degrade and use as a source of nucleoside and nucleotide for the cell .
unlike other macromolecule , dna do not serve a structural role in cell .

how do dna transmit genetic information to offspring ?
link to learning four  two  four chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five pave the way for women in science and health professions
historically , woman have be underrepresented in the science and in medicine , and often - pron - pioneering contribution have go relatively unnoticed .
for example , although rosalind franklin perform the x - ray diffraction study demonstrate the double helical structure of dna , - pron - be watson and crick who become famous for this discovery , build on - pron - datum .
there still remain great controversy over whether - pron - acquisition of - pron - datum be appropriate and whether personality conflict and gender bias contribute to the delayed recognition of - pron - significant contribution .
similarly , barbara mcclintock do pioneer work in maize ( corn ) genetic from the one  nine  three  zero s through one  nine  five  zero , discover transposon ( jump gene ) , but - pron - be not recognize until much later , receive a nobel prize in physiology or medicine in one  nine  eight  three ( figure one  zero  .  one  nine ) .
today , woman still remain underrepresented in many field of science and medicine .
while more than half of the undergraduate degree in science be award to woman , only four  six % of doctoral degree in science be award to woman .
in academia , the number of woman at each level of career advancement continue to decrease , with woman hold less than one - third of the position of ph . d . - level scientist in tenure - track position , and less than one - quarter of the full professorship at four  - year college and universities . [ one  one ]
even in the health profession , like nearly all other field , woman be often underrepresented in many medical career and earn significantly less than - pron - male counterpart , as show in a two  zero  one  three study publish by the journal of the american medical association . [ one  two ]
why do such disparity continue to exist and how do - pron - break these cycle ?
the situation be complex and likely result from the combination of various factor , include how society condition the behavior of girl from a young age and support - pron - interest , both professionally and personally .
some have suggest that woman do not belong in the laboratory , include nobel prize winner tim hunt , whose two  zero  one  five public comment suggest that woman be too emotional for science[ one  three ] be meet with widespread condemnation .
perhaps girl should be support more from a young age in the area of science and math ( figure one  zero  .  one  nine ) .
science , technology , engineering , and mathematic ( stem ) program sponsor by the american association of university women ( aauw ) [ one  four ] and national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) [ one  five ] be excellent example of program that offer such support .
contribution by woman in science should be make known more widely to the public , and marketing target to young girl should include more image of historically and professionally successful female scientist and medical professional , encourage all bright young mind , include girl and woman , to pursue career in science and medicine .
eye on ethics one  one .
new hampshire
wolfinger “
for female scientist , there be no good time to have child .
"
the atlantic july two  nine , two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . theatlantic . com / sex / archive /  two  zero  one  three  /  zero  seven  / for - female - scientist - there - no - good - time - to - have - children /  two  seven  eight  one  six  five  / . one  two .
s . a . seabury et al .
“
trends in the earning of male and female health care professionals in the united states , one  nine  eight  seven to two  zero  one  zero .
" journal of the american medical association internal medicine
one  seven  three
no .
one  eight ( two  zero  one  three  )  one  seven  four  eight – one  seven  five  zero .
one  three .
e . chung .
“
tim hunt , sexism and science 
the real ' trouble with girls ' in labs .
" cbc news technology and science , june one  two , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cbc . ca / news / technology / tim - hunt - sexism - and - science - the - real - trouble - with - girls - in - labs -  one  .  three  one  one  zero  one  three  three .
access eight  /  four  /  two  zero  one  six .
one  four .
american association of university women .
"
build a stem pipeline for girls and women .
"
http / / www . aauw . org / what - we - do /
stem - education / . accessed june one  zero , two  zero  one  six .
one  five .
national aeronautics and space administration .
“
outreach programs  women and girls initiative .
" http / / women . nasa . gov /
outreachprograms / . accessed june one  zero , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  two  five figure one  zero  .  one  nine
( a )
barbara mcclintock 's work on maize genetic in the one  nine  three  zero through one  nine  five  zero result in the discovery of transposon , but - pron - significance be not recognize at the time .
( b ) effort to appropriately mentor and to provide continued societal support for woman in science and medicine may someday help alleviate some of the issue prevent gender equality at all level in science and medicine .
( credit a  modification of work by smithsonian institution  credit b  modification of work by haynie sl , hinkle as , jones nl , martin ca , olsiewski pj , roberts mf )
part two base upon - pron - symptom , alex 's physician suspect that - pron - be suffer from a foodborne illness that - pron - acquire during - pron - travel .
possibility include bacterial infection ( e . g . , enterotoxigenic e . coli , vibrio cholerae , campylobacter
jejuni , salmonella ) , viral infection ( rotavirus or norovirus ) , or protozoan infection ( giardia lamblia , cryptosporidium parvum , or entamoeba histolytica ) .
- pron - physician order a stool sample to identify possible causative agent ( e . g . , bacteria , cyst ) and to look for the presence of blood because certain type of infectious agent ( like c . jejuni , salmonella , and e . histolytica ) be associate with the production of bloody stool .
alex 's stool sample show neither blood nor cyst .
follow analysis of - pron - stool sample and base upon - pron - recent travel history , the hospital physician suspect that alex be suffer from traveler 's diarrhea cause by enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec ) , the causative agent of most traveler 's diarrhea .
to verify the diagnosis and rule out other possibility , alex 's physician order a diagnostic lab test of - pron - stool sample to look for dna sequence encode specific virulence factor of etec .
the physician instruct alex to drink lot of fluid to replace what - pron - be lose and discharge - pron - from the hospital .
etec produce several plasmid - encode virulence factor that make - pron - pathogenic compare with typical e . coli .
these include the secrete toxin heat - labile enterotoxin ( lt ) and heat - stabile enterotoxin ( st ) , as well as colonization factor ( cf ) .
both lt and st cause the excretion of chloride ion from intestinal cell to the intestinal luman , cause a consequent loss of water from intestinal cell , result in diarrhea .
cf encode a bacterial protein that aid in allow the bacterium to adhere to the lining of the small intestine .

why do alex 's physician use genetic analysis instead of either isolation of bacteria from the stool sample or direct gram stain of the stool sample alone ?
clinical focus four  two  six chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  zero  .  three structure and function of rna learning objectives
 describe the biochemical structure of ribonucleotide
 describe the similarity and difference between rna and dna 
describe the function of the three main type of rna use in protein synthesis

explain how rna can serve as hereditary information structurally speak , ribonucleic acid ( rna ) , be quite similar to dna .
however , whereas dna molecule be typically long and double strand , rna molecule be much short and be typically single strand .
rna molecule perform a variety of role in the cell but be mainly involve in the process of protein synthesis ( translation ) and - pron - regulation .
rna structure rna be typically single strand and be make of ribonucleotide that be link by phosphodiest bond .
a ribonucleotide in the rna chain contain ribose ( the pentose sugar ) , one of the four nitrogenous basis ( a , u , g , and c ) , and a phosphate group .
the subtle structural difference between the sugar give dna add stability , make dna more suitable for storage of genetic information , whereas the relative instability of rna make - pron - more suitable for - pron - more short - term function .
the rna - specific pyrimidine uracil form a complementary base pair with adenine and be use instead of the thymine use in dna .
even though rna be single strand , most type of rna molecule show extensive intramolecular base pair between complementary sequence within the rna strand , create a predictable three - dimensional structure essential for - pron - function ( figure one  zero  .  two  zero and figure one  zero  .  two  one ) .
figure one  zero  .  two  zero
( a ) ribonucleotide contain the pentose sugar ribose instead of the deoxyribose find in deoxyribonucleotide .
( b ) rna contain the pyrimidine uracil in place of thymine find in dna .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  two  seven figure one  zero  .  two  one ( a ) dna be typically double strand , whereas rna be typically single strand .
( b )
although - pron - be single strand , rna can fold upon - pron - , with the fold stabilize by short area of complementary base pair within the molecule , form a three - dimensional structure .

how do the structure of rna differ from the structure of dna ?
function of rna in protein synthesis cells access the information store in dna by create rna to direct the synthesis of protein through the process of translation .
protein within a cell have many function , include build cellular structure and serve as enzyme catalyst for cellular chemical reaction that give cell - pron - specific characteristic .
the three main type of rna directly involve in protein synthesis be messenger rna ( mrna ) , ribosomal rna ( rrna ) , and transfer rna ( trna ) .
in one  nine  six  one , french scientist françois jacob and jacques monod hypothesize the existence of an intermediary between dna and - pron - protein product , which - pron - call messenger rna . [ one  six ]
evidence support - pron - hypothesis be gather soon afterwards show that information from dna be transmit to the ribosome for protein synthesis use mrna .
if dna serve as the complete library of cellular information , mrna serve as a photocopy of specific information need at a particular point in time that serve as the instruction to make a protein .
the mrna carry the message from the dna , which control all of the cellular activity in a cell .
if a cell require a certain protein to be synthesize , the gene for this product be
" turn on " and the mrna be synthesize through the process of transcription ( see rna transcription ) .
the mrna then interact with ribosome and other one  six . a . rich .
"
the era of rna awakening  structural biology of rna in the early years .
"
quarterly reviews of biophysics four  two
no .
two ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  one  one  seven – one  three  seven .
four  two  eight chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cellular machinery ( figure one  zero  .  two  two ) to direct the synthesis of the protein - pron - encode during the process of translation ( see protein synthesis ) .
mrna be relatively unstable and short - lived in the cell , especially in prokaryotic cell , ensure that protein be only make when need .
figure one  zero  .  two  two
a generalize illustration of how mrna and trna be use in protein synthesis within a cell .
rrna and trna be stable type of rna .
in prokaryote and eukaryote , trna and rrna be encode in the dna , then copy into long rna molecule that be cut to release small fragment contain the individual mature rna specie .
in eukaryote , synthesis , cutting , and assembly of rrna into ribosome take place in the nucleolus region of the nucleus , but these activity occur in the cytoplasm of prokaryote .
neither of these type of rna carry instruction to direct the synthesis of a polypeptide , but - pron - play other important role in protein synthesis .
ribosome be compose of rrna and protein .
as - pron - name suggest , rrna be a major constituent of ribosome , compose up to about six  zero % of the ribosome by mass and provide the location where the mrna bind .
the rrna ensure the proper alignment of the mrna , trna , and the ribosome  the rrna of the ribosome also have an enzymatic activity ( peptidyl transferase ) and catalyze the formation of the peptide bond between two align amino acid during protein synthesis .
although rrna have long be think to serve primarily a structural role , - pron - catalytic role within the ribosome be prove in two  zero  zero  zero  . [ one  seven ]
scientist in the laboratory of thomas steitz ( one  nine  four  zero – ) and peter moore ( one  nine  three  nine – ) at yale university be able to crystallize the ribosome structure from haloarcula marismortui , a halophilic archaeon isolate from the dead sea .
because of the importance of this work , steitz share the two  zero  zero  nine nobel prize in chemistry with other scientist who make significant contribution to the understanding of ribosome structure .
transfer rna be the third main type of rna and one of the small , usually only seven  zero – nine  zero nucleotide long .
- pron - carry the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis in the ribosome .
- pron - be the base pair between the trna and mrna that allow for the correct amino acid to be insert in the polypeptide chain be synthesize ( figure one  zero  .  two  three ) .
any mutation in the trna or rrna can result in global problem for the cell because both be necessary for proper protein synthesis ( table one  zero  .  one ) .
one  seven .
p . nissen et al .
“
the structural basis of ribosome activity in peptide bond synthesis .
”
science two  eight  nine
no . five  four  eight  one ( two  zero  zero  zero  )  nine  two  zero – nine  three  zero .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  two  nine figure
one  zero  .  two  three
a trna molecule be a single - strand molecule that exhibit significant intracellular base pair , give - pron - - pron - characteristic three - dimensional shape .
structure and function of rna
mrna rrna
trna structure short , unstable , singlestranded rna correspond to a gene encode within dna longer , stable rna molecule compose six  zero % of ribosome 's mass short ( seven  zero - nine  zero nucleotide ) , stable rna with extensive intramolecular base pair  contain an amino acid bind site and an mrna bind site function serve as intermediary between dna and protein  use by ribosome to direct synthesis of protein - pron - encode ensure the proper alignment of mrna , trna , and ribosome during protein synthesis  catalyze peptide bond formation between amino acid carry the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis in the ribosome table one  zero  .  one 
what be the function of the three major type of rna molecule involve in protein synthesis ?
four  three  zero chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five rna as hereditary information
although rna do not serve as the hereditary information in most cell , rna do hold this function for many virus that do not contain dna .
thus , rna clearly do have the additional capacity to serve as genetic information .
although rna be typically single strand within cell , there be significant diversity in virus .
rhinoviruses , which cause the common cold  influenza virus  and the ebola virus be single - strand rna virus .
rotavirus , which cause severe gastroenteriti in child and other immunocompromised individual , be example of double - strand rna virus .
because double - strand rna be uncommon in eukaryotic cell , - pron - presence serve as an indicator of viral infection .
the implication for a virus have an rna genome instead of a dna genome be discuss in more detail in viruses .
one  zero  .  four structure and function of cellular genomes learning objectives

define gene and genotype and differentiate genotype from phenotype
 describe chromosome structure and packaging
 compare prokaryotic and eukaryotic chromosome 
explain why extrachromosomal dna be important in a cell
thus far , - pron - have discuss the structure and function of individual piece of dna and rna .
in this section , - pron - will discuss how all of an organism 's genetic material - collectively refer to as - pron - genome - be organize inside of the cell .
since an organism 's genetic to a large extent dictate - pron - characteristic , - pron - should not be surprising that organism differ in the arrangement of - pron - dna and rna .
genotype versus phenotype
all cellular activity be encode within a cell 's dna .
the sequence of basis within a dna molecule represent the genetic information of the cell .
segment of dna molecule be call gene , and individual gene contain the instructional code necessary for synthesize various protein , enzyme , or stable rna molecule .
the full collection of gene that a cell contain within - pron - genome be call - pron - genotype .
however , a cell do not express all of - pron - gene simultaneously .
instead , - pron - turn on ( express ) or turn off certain gene when necessary .
the set of gene be express at any give point in time determine the cell 's activity and - pron - observable characteristic , refer to as - pron - phenotype .
gene that be always express be know as constitutive gene  some constitutive gene be know as housekeep gene because - pron - be necessary for the basic function of the cell .
while the genotype of a cell remain constant , the phenotype may change in response to environmental signal ( e . g . , change in temperature or nutrient availability ) that affect which nonconstitutive gene be express .
for example , the oral bacterium streptococcus mutan produce a sticky slime layer that allow - pron - to adhere to tooth , form dental plaque  however , the gene that control the production of the slime layer be only express in the presence of sucrose ( table sugar ) .
thus , while the genotype of s . mutan be constant , - pron - phenotype change depend on the presence and absence of sugar in - pron - environment .
temperature can also regulate gene expression .
for example , the gram - negative bacterium serratia marcescen , a pathogen frequently associate with hospital - acquire infection , produce a red pigment at two  eight ° c but not at three  seven ° c , the normal internal temperature of the human body ( figure one  zero  .  two  four ) .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  three  one figure one  zero  .  two  four
both plate contain strain of serratia marcescen that have the gene for red pigment .
however , this gene be express at two  eight ° c ( leave ) but not at three  seven ° c ( right ) .
( credit  modification of work by ann auman ) organization of genetic material
the vast majority of an organism 's genome be organize into the cell 's chromosome , which be discrete dna structure within cell that control cellular activity .
recall that while eukaryotic chromosome be house in the membrane - bind nucleus , most prokaryote contain a single , circular chromosome that be find in an area of the cytoplasm call the nucleoid ( see unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells ) .
a chromosome may contain several thousand gene .
organization of eukaryotic chromosome chromosome structure differ somewhat between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell .
eukaryotic chromosome be typically linear , and eukaryotic cell contain multiple distinct chromosome .
many eukaryotic cell contain two copy of each chromosome and , therefore , be diploid .
the length of a chromosome greatly exceed the length of the cell , so a chromosome need to be package into a very small space to fit within the cell .
for example , the combined length of all of the three billion base pairs[ one  eight ] of dna of the human genome would measure approximately two meter if completely stretch out , and some eukaryotic genome be many time large than the human genome .
dna supercoiling refer to the process by which dna be twist to fit inside the cell .
supercoiling may result in dna that be either underwound ( less than one turn of the helix per one  zero base pair ) or overwound ( more than one turn per one  zero base pair ) from - pron - normal relaxed state .
protein know to be involve in supercoile include topoisomerase  these enzyme help maintain the structure of supercoiled chromosome , prevent overwinding of dna during certain cellular process like dna replication .
during dna packaging , dna - bind protein call histone perform various level of dna wrapping and attachment to scaffold protein .
the combination of dna with these attach protein be refer to as chromatin .
in eukaryote , the packaging of dna by histone may be influence by environmental factor that affect the presence of methyl group on certain cytosine nucleotide of dna .
the influence of environmental factor on dna packaging be call epigenetic .
epigenetic be another mechanism for regulate gene expression without alter the sequence of nucleotide .
epigenetic change can be maintain through multiple round of cell division and , therefore , can be heritable .
one  eight .
national human genome research institute .
"
the human genome project completion  frequently ask questions .
"
https / / www . genome . gov /  one  one  zero  zero  six  nine  four  three .
accessed june one  zero , two  zero  one  six
four  three  two chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five view this animation ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two dnapackanim ) from the dna learning center to learn more about on dna packaging in eukaryote .
organization of prokaryotic chromosomes chromosomes in bacteria and archaea be usually circular , and a prokaryotic cell typically contain only a single chromosome within the nucleoid .
because the chromosome contain only one copy of each gene , prokaryote be haploid .
as in eukaryotic cell , dna supercoiling be necessary for the genome to fit within the prokaryotic cell .
the dna in the bacterial chromosome be arrange in several supercoile domain .
as with eukaryote , topoisomerase be involve in supercoile dna .
dna gyrase be a type of topoisomerase , find in bacteria and some archaea , that help prevent the overwinding of dna .
( some antibiotic kill bacteria by target dna gyrase . )
in addition , histonelike protein bind dna and aid in dna packaging .
other protein bind to the origin of replication , the location in the chromosome where dna replication initiate .
because different region of dna be package differently , some region of chromosomal dna be more accessible to enzyme and thus may be use more readily as template for gene expression .
interestingly , several bacteria , include helicobacter pylorus and shigella flexneri , have be show to induce epigenetic change in - pron - host upon infection , lead to chromatin remodeling that may cause long - term effect on host immunity . [ one  nine ] 
what be the difference between a cell 's genotype and - pron - phenotype ?

how do dna fit inside cell ?
noncode dna
in addition to gene , a genome also contain many region of noncode dna that do not encode protein or stable rna product .
noncode dna be commonly find in area prior to the start of code sequence of gene as well as in intergenic region ( i . e . , dna sequence locate between gene )
( figure one  zero  .  two  five ) .
link to learning one  nine .
h . bierne et al .
“
epigenetics and bacterial infections .
"
cold spring harbor perspectives in medicine two
no .
one  two
( two  zero  one  two  ) a zero  one  zero  two  seven  two .
chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  three  three figure one  zero  .  two  five
chromosomes typically have a significant amount of noncode dna , often find in intergenic region .
prokaryote appear to use - pron - genome very efficiently , with only an average of one  two % of the genome be take up by noncode sequence .
in contrast , noncode dna can represent about nine  eight % of the genome in eukaryote , as see in human , but the percentage of noncode dna varie between species . [ two  zero ]
these noncoding dna region be once refer to as " junk dna "  however , this terminology be no longer widely accept because scientist have since find role for some of these region , many of which contribute to the regulation of transcription or translation through the production of small noncode rna molecule , dna packaging , and chromosomal stability .
although scientist may not fully understand the role of all noncoding region of dna , - pron - be generally believe that - pron - do have purpose within the cell .

what be the role of noncode dna ?
extrachromosomal dna
although most dna be contain within a cell 's chromosome , many cell have additional molecule of dna outside the chromosome , call extrachromosomal dna , that be also part of - pron - genome .
the genome of eukaryotic cell would also include the chromosome from any organelle such as mitochondria and / or chloroplast that these cell maintain ( figure one  zero  .  two  six ) .
the maintenance of circular chromosome in these organelle be a vestige of - pron - prokaryotic origin and support the endosymbiotic theory ( see foundations of modern cell theory ) .
in some case , genome of certain dna virus can also be maintain independently in host cell during latent viral infection .
in these case , these virus be another form of extrachromosomal dna .
for example , the human papillomavirus ( hpv ) may be maintain in infected cell in this way .
two  zero .
r . j . taft et al .
"
the relationship between non - protein - coding dna and eukaryotic complexity .
"
bioessay two  nine
no .
three ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  two  eight  eight – two  nine  nine .
four  three  four chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  zero  .  two  six
the genome of a eukaryotic cell consist of the chromosome house in the nucleus , and extrachromosomal dna find in the mitochondria ( all cell ) and chloroplast ( plant and algae ) .
besides chromosome , some prokaryote also have small loop of dna call plasmid that may contain one or a few gene not essential for normal growth
( figure three  .  one  two ) .
bacteria can exchange these plasmid with other bacteria in a process know as horizontal gene transfer hgt ) .
the exchange of genetic material on plasmid sometimes provide microbe with new gene beneficial for growth and survival under special condition .
in some case , gene obtain from plasmid may have clinical implication , encode virulence factor that give a microbe the ability to cause disease or make a microbe resistant to certain antibiotic .
plasmid be also use heavily in genetic engineering and biotechnology as a way to move gene from one cell to another .
the role of plasmid in horizontal gene transfer and biotechnology will be discuss further in mechanisms of microbial genetics and modern applications of microbial genetics .

how be plasmid involve in antibiotic resistance ?
lethal plasmids maria , a two  zero  - year - old anthropology student from texas , recently become ill in the african nation of botswana , where - pron - be conduct research as part of a study - abroad program .
maria 's research be focus on traditional african method of tan hide for the production of leather .
over a period of three week , - pron - visit a tannery daily for several hour to observe and participate in the tanning process .
one day , after return from the tannery , maria develop a fever , chill , and a headache , along with chest pain , muscle ache , nausea , and other flu - like symptom .
initially , - pron - be not concern , but when - pron - fever spike and - pron - begin to cough up blood , - pron - african host family become alarm and rush - pron - to the hospital , where - pron - condition continue to worsen .
after learn about - pron - recent work at the tannery , the physician suspect that maria have be expose to anthrax .
- pron - order a chest x - ray , a blood sample , and a spinal tap , and immediately start - pron - on a course of intravenous penicillin .
unfortunately , lab test confirm the physician 's presumptive diagnosis .
maria 's chest x - ray exhibit pleural effusion , the accumulation of fluid in the space between the pleural membrane , case in point chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  three  five and a gram stain of - pron - blood reveal the presence of gram - positive , rod - shape bacteria in short chain , consistent with bacillus anthracis .
blood and bacteria be also show to be present in - pron - cerebrospinal fluid , indicate that the infection have progress to meningitis .
despite supportive treatment and aggressive antibiotic therapy , maria slip into an unresponsive state and die three day later .
anthrax be a disease cause by the introduction of endospore from the gram - positive bacterium b . anthracis into the body .
once infect , patient typically develop meningitis , often with fatal result .
in maria 's case , - pron - inhale the endospore while handle the hide of animal that have be infect .
the genome of b . anthracis illustrate how small structural difference can lead to major difference in virulence .
in two  zero  zero  three , the genome of b . anthracis and bacillus cereus , a similar but less pathogenic bacterium of the same genus , be sequence and compared . [ two  one
] researcher discover that the one  six s rrna gene sequence of these bacteria be more than nine  nine % identical , mean that - pron - be actually member of the same specie despite - pron - traditional classification as separate specie .
although - pron - chromosomal sequence also reveal a great deal of similarity , several virulence factor of b . anthracis be find to be encode on two large plasmid not find in b . cereus .
the plasmid px zero  one encode a three - part toxin that suppress the host immune system , whereas the plasmid px zero  two encode a capsular polysaccharide that further protect the bacterium from the host immune system ( figure one  zero  .  two  seven ) .
since b . cereus lack these plasmid , - pron - do not produce these virulence factor , and although - pron - be still pathogenic , - pron - be typically associate with mild case of diarrhea from which the body can quickly recover .
unfortunately for maria , the presence of these toxinencode plasmid in b . anthracis give - pron - - pron - lethal virulence .
figure one  zero  .  two  seven
genome sequencing of bacillus anthracis and - pron - close relative b . cereus reveal that the pathogenicity of b . anthracis be due to the maintenance of two plasmid , px zero  one and px zero  two , which encode virulence factor .

what do - pron - think would happen to the pathogenicity of b . anthracis if - pron - lose one or both of - pron - plasmid ?
resolution
within two  four hour , the result of the diagnostic test analysis of alex 's stool sample reveal that - pron - be positive for heat - labile enterotoxin ( lt ) , heat - stabile enterotoxin ( st ) , and colonization factor ( cf ) , confirm the hospital physician 's suspicion of etec .
during a follow - up with alex 's family physician , this physician note that alex 's symptom be not resolve quickly and - pron - be experience discomfort that be prevent - pron - from return to class .
the family physician prescribe alex a course of ciprofloxacin to resolve - pron - symptom .
fortunately , the ciprofloxacin resolve alex 's symptom within a few day .
clinical focus two  one .
n . ivanova et al .
"
genome sequence of bacillus cereus and comparative analysis with bacillus anthracis .
"
nature four  two  three
no .
six  nine  three  five ( two  zero  zero  three  )  eight  seven – nine  one .
four  three  six chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five alex likely get - pron - infection from ingest contaminate food or water .
emerge industrialized country like mexico be still develop sanitation practice that prevent the contamination of water with fecal material .
traveler in such country should avoid the ingestion of undercooked food , especially meat , seafood , vegetable , and unpasteurized dairy product .
- pron - should also avoid use of water that have not be treat  this include drinking water , ice cube , and even water use for brush tooth .
use bottled water for these purpose be a good alternative .
good hygiene ( handwashing ) can also aid the prevention of an etec infection .
alex have not be careful about - pron - food or water consumption , which lead to - pron - illness .
alex 's symptom be very similar to those of cholera , cause by the gram - negative bacterium vibrio cholerae , which also produce a toxin similar to st and lt .
at some point in the evolutionary history of etec , a nonpathogenic strain of e . coli similar to those typically find in the gut may have acquire the gene encode the st and lt toxin from v . cholerae .
the fact that the gene encode those toxin be encode on extrachromosomal plasmid in etec support the idea that these gene be acquire by e . coli and be likely maintain in bacterial population through horizontal gene transfer .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
viral genomes viral genome exhibit significant diversity in structure .
some virus have genome that consist of dna as - pron - genetic material .
this dna may be single strand , as exemplify by human parvovirus , or double strand , as see in the herpesviruse and poxvirus .
additionally , although all cellular life use dna as - pron - genetic material , some viral genome be make of either single - strand or double - strand rna molecule , as - pron - have discuss .
viral genome be typically small than most bacterial genome , encode only a few gene , because - pron - rely on - pron - host to carry out many of the function require for - pron - replication .
the diversity of viral genome structure and - pron - implication for viral replication life cycle be discuss in more detail in the viral life cycle .

why do viral genome vary widely among virus ?
genome size matters
there be great variation in size of genome among different organism .
most eukaryote maintain multiple chromosome  human , for example have two  three pair , give - pron - four  six chromosome .
despite be large at three billion base pair , the human genome be far from the large genome .
plant often maintain very large genome , up to one  five  zero billion base pair , and commonly be polyploid , have multiple copy of each chromosome .
the size of bacterial genome also vary considerably , although - pron - tend to be small than eukaryotic genome ( figure one  zero  .  two  eight ) .
some bacterial genome may be as small as only one  one  two  ,  zero  zero  zero base pair .
often , the size of a bacterium 's genome directly relate to how much the bacterium depend on - pron - host for survival .
when a bacterium rely on the host cell to carry out certain function , - pron - lose the gene encode the ability to carry out those function - pron - .
these type of bacterial endosymbiont be reminiscent of the prokaryotic origin of mitochondria and chloroplast .
from a clinical perspective , obligate intracellular pathogen also tend to have small genome ( some around micro connections chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  three  seven one million base pair ) .
because host cell supply most of - pron - nutrient , - pron - tend to have a reduced number of gene encode metabolic function .
due to - pron - small size , the genome of organism like mycoplasma genitalium ( five  eight  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero base pair ) , chlamydia trachomatis ( one  .  zero million ) , rickettsia prowazekii ( one  .  one million ) , and treponema pallidum ( one  .  one million ) be some of the early bacterial genome sequence .
respectively , these pathogen cause urethritis and pelvic inflammation , chlamydia , typhus , and syphilis .
whereas obligate intracellular pathogen have unusually small genome , other bacteria with a great variety of metabolic and enzymatic capability have unusually large bacterial genome .
pseudomonas aeruginosa , for example , be a bacterium commonly find in the environment and be able to grow on a wide range of substrate .
- pron - genome contain six  .  three million base pair , give - pron - a high metabolic ability and the ability to produce virulence factor that cause several type of opportunistic infection .
interestingly , there have be significant variability in genome size in virus as well , range from three  ,  five  zero  zero base pair to two  .  five million base pair , significantly exceed the size of many bacterial genome .
the great variation observe in viral genome size further contribute to the great diversity of viral genome characteristic already discuss .
figure one  zero  .  two  eight
there be great variability as well as overlap among the genome size of various group of organism and virus .
four  three  eight chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five visit the genome database ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two ncbigendata ) of the national center for biotechnology information ( ncbi ) to see the genome that have be sequence and - pron - size .
summary one  zero  .  one use microbiology to discover the secrets of life
 dna be discover and characterize long before - pron - role in heredity be understand .
microbiologist play significant role in demonstrate that dna be the hereditary information find within cell .

in the one  eight  five  zero and one  eight  six  zero , gregor mendel experiment with true - breed garden pea to demonstrate the heritability of specific observable trait .

in one  eight  six  nine , friedrich miescher isolate and purify a compound rich in phosphorus from the nucleus of white blood cell  - pron - name the compound nuclein .
miescher 's student richard altmann discover - pron - acidic nature , rename - pron - nucleic acid .
albrecht kossell characterize the nucleotide basis find within nucleic acid .

although walter sutton and theodor boveri propose the chromosomal theory of inheritance in one  nine  zero  two , - pron - be not scientifically demonstrate until the one  nine  one  five publication of the work of thomas hunt morgan and - pron - colleague .

use acetabularia , a large algal cell , as - pron - model system , joachim hämmerling demonstrate in the one  nine  three  zero and one  nine  four  zero that the nucleus be the location of hereditary information in these cell .

in the one  nine  four  zero , george beadle and edward tatum use the mold neurospora crassa to show that each protein 's production be under the control of a single gene , demonstrate the " one gene – one enzyme ” hypothesis .

in one  nine  two  eight , frederick griffith show that dead encapsulated bacteria could pass genetic information to live nonencapsulated bacteria and transform - pron - into harmful strain .
in one  nine  four  four , oswald avery , colin mcleod , and maclyn mccarty identify the compound as dna .

the nature of dna as the molecule that store genetic information be unequivocally demonstrate in the experiment of alfred hershey and martha chase publish in one  nine  five  two .
label dna from bacterial virus enter and infect bacterial cell , give rise to more viral particle .
the label protein coat do not participate in the transmission of genetic information .
one  zero  .  two structure and function of dna

nucleic acid be compose of nucleotide , each of which contain a pentose sugar , a phosphate group , and a nitrogenous base .
deoxyribonucleotide within dna contain deoxyribose as the pentose sugar .

dna contain the pyrimidine cytosine and thymine , and the purine adenine and guanine .

nucleotide be link together by phosphodiest bond between the five ʹ phosphate group of one nucleotide and the three ʹ hydroxyl group of another .
a nucleic acid strand have a free phosphate group at the five ʹ end and a free hydroxyl group at the three ʹ end .

chargaff discover that the amount of adenine be approximately equal to the amount of thymine in dna , and that the amount of the guanine be approximately equal to cytosine .
these relationship be later determined to be due to complementary base pair .

watson and crick , build on the work of chargaff , franklin and gosling , and wilkins , propose the double helix model and base pairing for dna structure .

dna be compose of two complementary strand orient antiparallel to each other with the phosphodiest backbone on the exterior of the molecule .
the nitrogenous basis of each strand face each other and link to learn chapter one  zero  biochemistry of the genome four  three  nine complementary basis hydrogen bond to each other , stabilize the double helix .

heat or chemical can break the hydrogen bond between complementary basis , denature dna .
cooling or remove chemical can lead to renaturation or reannealing of dna by allow hydrogen bond to reform between complementary basis .

dna store the instruction need to build and control the cell .
this information be transmit from parent to offspring through vertical gene transfer .
one  zero  .  three structure and function of rna  ribonucleic acid ( rna ) be typically single strand and contain ribose as - pron - pentose sugar and the pyrimidine uracil instead of thymine .
an rna strand can undergo significant intramolecular base pair to take on a three - dimensional structure .

there be three main type of rna , all involve in protein synthesis .

messenger rna ( mrna ) serve as the intermediary between dna and the synthesis of protein product during translation .

ribosomal rna ( rrna ) be a type of stable rna that be a major constituent of ribosome .
- pron - ensure the proper alignment of the mrna and the ribosome during protein synthesis and catalyze the formation of the peptide bond between two align amino acid during protein synthesis .

transfer rna ( trna ) be a small type of stable rna that carry an amino acid to the corresponding site of protein synthesis in the ribosome .
- pron - be the base pair between the trna and mrna that allow for the correct amino acid to be insert in the polypeptide chain be synthesize .

although rna be not use for long - term genetic information in cell , many virus do use rna as - pron - genetic material .
one  zero  .  four structure and function of cellular genomes

the entire genetic content of a cell be - pron - genome .

genes code for protein , or stable rna molecule , each of which carry out a specific function in the cell .

although the genotype that a cell possess remain constant , expression of gene be dependent on environmental condition .

a phenotype be the observable characteristic of a cell ( or organism ) at a give point in time and result from the complement of gene currently be use .

the majority of genetic material be organize into chromosome that contain the dna that control cellular activity .

prokaryotes be typically haploid , usually have a single circular chromosome find in the nucleoid .
eukaryote be diploid  dna be organize into multiple linear chromosome find in the nucleus .
 supercoiling and dna packaging use dna bind protein allow lengthy molecule to fit inside a cell .
eukaryote and archaea use histone protein , and bacteria use different protein with similar function .

prokaryotic and eukaryotic genome both contain noncode dna , the function of which be not well understand .
some noncode dna appear to participate in the formation of small noncoding rna molecule that influence gene expression  some appear to play a role in maintain chromosomal structure and in dna packaging .

extrachromosomal dna in eukaryote include the chromosome find within organelle of prokaryotic origin ( mitochondria and chloroplast ) that evolve by endosymbiosis .
some virus may also maintain - pron - extrachromosomally .

extrachromosomal dna in prokaryote be commonly maintain as plasmid that encode a few nonessential gene that may be helpful under specific condition .
plasmid can be spread through a bacterial community by horizontal gene transfer .
 viral genome show extensive variation and may be compose of either rna or dna , and may be either double or single strand .
chapter one  one mechanisms of microbial genetics figure one  one  .  one escherichia coli ( leave ) may not appear to have much in common with an elephant ( right ) , but the genetic blueprint for these vastly different organism be both encode in dna .
( credit leave  modification of work by niaid  credit right 
modification of work by tom lubbock ) chapter outline one  one  .  one
the functions of genetic material one  one  .  two dna replication one  one  .  three rna transcription one  one  .  four protein synthesis ( translation )
one  one  .  five mutation one  one  .  six
how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity one  one  .  seven gene regulation  operon theory introduction
in one  nine  five  four , french scientist and future nobel laureate jacques monod ( one  nine  one  zero – one  nine  seven  six ) famously say , " what be true in e . coli be true in the elephant , " suggest that the biochemistry of life be maintain throughout evolution and be share in all form of know life .
since monod 's famous statement , - pron - have learn a great deal about the mechanism of gene regulation , expression , and replication in live cell .
all cell use dna for information storage , share the same genetic code , and use similar mechanism to replicate and express - pron - .
although many aspect of genetic be universally share , variation do exist among contemporary genetic system .
- pron - now know that within the share overall theme of the genetic mechanism , there be significant difference among the three domain of life  eukarya , archaea , and bacteria .
additionally , virus , cellular parasite but not - pron - live cell , show dramatic variation in - pron - genetic material and the replication and gene expression process .
some of these difference have allow - pron - to engineer clinical tool such as antibiotic and antiviral drug that specifically inhibit the reproduction of pathogen yet be harmless to - pron - host .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  four  five one  one  .  one
the functions of genetic material learning objectives

explain the two function of the genome 
explain the meaning of the central dogma of molecular biology 
differentiate between genotype and phenotype and explain how environmental factor influence phenotype dna serve two essential function that deal with cellular information .
first , dna be the genetic material responsible for inheritance and be pass from parent to offspring for all life on earth .
to preserve the integrity of this genetic information , dna must be replicate with great accuracy , with minimal error that introduce change to the dna sequence .
a genome contain the full complement of dna within a cell and be organize into small , discrete unit call gene that be arrange on chromosome and plasmid .
the second function of dna be to direct and regulate the construction of the protein necessary to a cell for growth and reproduction in a particular cellular environment .
a gene be compose of dna that be " read " or transcribe to produce an rna molecule during the process of transcription .
one major type of rna molecule , call messenger rna ( mrna ) , provide the information for the ribosome to catalyze protein synthesis in a process call translation .
the process of transcription and translation be collectively refer to as gene expression .
gene expression be the synthesis of a specific protein with a sequence of amino acid that be encode in the gene .
the flow of genetic information from dna to rna to protein be describe by the central dogma ( figure one  one  .  two ) .
this central dogma of molecular biology further elucidate the mechanism behind beadle and tatum 's “ one gene - one enzyme ” hypothesis ( see use microorganism to discover the secrets of life ) .
each of the process of replication , transcription , and translation include the stage of one ) initiation , two ) elongation ( polymerization ) , and three ) termination .
these stage will be describe in more detail in this chapter .
figure one  one  .  two
the central dogma state that dna encode messenger rna , which , in turn , encode protein .
a cell 's genotype be the full collection of gene - pron - contain , whereas - pron - phenotype be the set of observable characteristic that result from those gene .
the phenotype be the product of the array of protein be produce by part one mark be six  zero  - year - old software engineer who suffer from type ii diabete , which - pron - monitor and keep under control largely through diet and exercise .
one spring morning , while do some gardening , - pron - scrap - pron - low leg while walk through blackberry bramble .
- pron - continue work all day in the yard and do not bother to clean the wound and treat - pron - with antibiotic ointment until later that evening .
for the next two day , - pron - leg become increasingly red , swollen , and warm to the touch .
- pron - be sore not only on the surface , but deep in the muscle .
after two  four hour , mark develop a fever and stiffness in the affected leg .
feel increasingly weak , - pron - call a neighbor , who drive - pron - to the emergency department .

do mark wait too long to seek medical attention ?
at what point do - pron - sign and symptom warrant seek medical attention ?

what type of infection or other condition may be responsible for mark 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus four  four  six chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the cell at a give time , which be influence by the cell 's genotype as well as interaction with the cell 's environment .
gene code for protein that have function in the cell .
production of a specific protein encode by an individual gene often result in a distinct phenotype for the cell compare with the phenotype without that protein .
for this reason , - pron - be also common to refer to the genotype of an individual gene and - pron - phenotype .
although a cell 's genotype remain constant , not all gene be use to direct the production of - pron - protein simultaneously .
cell carefully regulate expression of - pron - gene , only use gene to make specific protein when those protein be need ( figure one  one  .  three ) .
figure one  one  .  three phenotype be determine by the specific gene within a genotype that be express under specific condition .
although multiple cell may have the same genotype , - pron - may exhibit a wide range of phenotype result from difference in pattern of gene expression in response to different environmental condition .

what be the two function of dna ?

distinguish between the genotype and phenotype of a cell .

how can cell have the same genotype but differ in - pron - phenotype ?
use and abuse of genome data
why can some human harbor opportunistic pathogen like haemophilus influenzae , staphylococcus aureus , or streptococcus pyogene , in - pron - upper respiratory tract but remain asymptomatic carrier , while other individual become seriously ill when infect ?
there be evidence suggest that difference in susceptibility to infection between patient may be a result , at least in part , of genetic difference between human host .
for example , genetic difference in human leukocyte antigen ( hlas ) and red blood cell antigen among host have be implicate in different immune response and result disease progression from infection with h . influenzae .
because the genetic interplay between pathogen and host may contribute to disease outcome , understand difference in genetic makeup between individual may be an important clinical tool .
ecological genomic be a relatively new field that seek to understand how the genotype of different organism interact with each other in nature .
the field answer question about how gene expression of one organism affect gene expression of another .
medical application of ecological genomic will focus on how pathogen interact with specific individual , as oppose to human in general .
such analysis would allow medical professional to use knowledge of an individual 's genotype to apply more individualized plan for treatment and prevention of eye on ethics chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  four  seven disease .
with the advent of next - generation sequencing , - pron - be relatively easy to obtain the entire genomic sequence of pathogen  a bacterial genome can be sequence in as little as a day . [ one ]
the speed and cost of sequence the human genome have also be greatly reduce and , already , individual can submit sample to receive extensive report on - pron - personal genetic trait , include ancestry and carrier status for various genetic disease .
as sequence technology progress further , such service will continue to become less expensive , more extensive , and quicker .
however , as this day quickly approach , there be many ethical concern with which society must grapple .
for example , should genome sequencing be a standard practice for everybody ?
should - pron - be require by law or by employer if - pron - will lower health - care cost ?
if one refuse genome sequencing , do - pron - or - pron - forfeit - pron - or - pron - right to health insurance coverage ?
for what purpose should the datum be use ?
who should oversee proper use of these datum ?
if genome sequencing reveal predisposition to a particular disease , do insurance company have the right to increase rate ?
will employer treat an employee differently ?
know that environmental influence also affect disease development , how should the datum on the presence of a particular disease - cause allele in an individual be use ethically ?
the genetic information nondiscrimination act of two  zero  zero  eight ( gina ) currently prohibit discriminatory practice base on genetic information by both health insurance company and employer .
however , gina do not cover life , disability , or long - term care insurance policy .
clearly , all member of society must continue to engage in conversation about these issue so that such genomic datum can be use to improve health care while simultaneously protect an individual 's right .
one  one  .  two dna replication learning objectives

explain the meaning of semiconservative dna replication 
explain why dna replication be bidirectional and include both a lead and lag strand 
explain why okazaki fragment be form 
describe the process of dna replication and the function of the enzyme involve

identify the difference between dna replication in bacteria and eukaryote 
explain the process of roll circle replication
the elucidation of the structure of the double helix by james watson and francis crick in one  nine  five  three provide a hint as to how dna be copy during the process of replication .
separate the strand of the double helix would provide two template for the synthesis of new complementary strand , but exactly how new dna molecule be construct be still unclear .
in one model , semiconservative replication , the two strand of the double helix separate during dna replication , and each strand serve as a template from which the new complementary strand be copy  after replication , each double - strand dna include one parental or " old " strand and one “ new ” strand .
there be two compete model
also suggest  conservative and dispersive , which be show in figure one  one  .  four .
one .
d . j . edwards , k . e . holt .
“
beginner 's guide to comparative bacterial genome analysis
use next - generation sequence data .
"
microbial informatics and experimentation three
no .
one ( two  zero  one  three  )  two . four  four  eight
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  four
there be three model suggest for dna replication .
in the conservative model , parental dna strand ( blue ) remain associate in one dna molecule while new daughter strand ( red ) remain associate in newly form dna molecule .
in the semiconservative model , parental strand separate and direct the synthesis of a daughter strand , with each result dna molecule be a hybrid of a parental strand and a daughter strand .
in the dispersive model , all result dna strand have region of double - strand parental dna and region of doublestrande daughter dna .
matthew meselson ( one  nine  three  zero – ) and franklin stahl ( one  nine  two  nine – ) devise an experiment in one  nine  five  eight to test which of these model correctly represent dna replication ( figure one  one  .  five ) .
- pron - grow e . coli for several generation in a medium contain a " heavy " isotope of nitrogen ( one  five n ) that be incorporate into nitrogenous basis and , eventually , into the dna .
this label the parental dna .
the e . coli culture be then shift into a medium contain one  four n and allow to grow for one generation .
the cell be harvest and the dna be isolate .
the dna be separate by ultracentrifugation , during which the dna form band accord to - pron - density .
dna grow in one  five n would be expect to form a band at a high density position than that grow in one  four n . meselson and stahl note that after one generation of growth in one  four n , the single band observe be intermediate in position in between dna of cell grow exclusively in one  five n or one  four n .
this suggest either a semiconservative or dispersive mode of replication .
some cell be allow to grow for one more generation in one  four n and spin again .
the dna harvest from cell grow for two generation in one  four n form two band  one dna band be at the intermediate position between one  five n and one  four n , and the other correspond to the band of one  four n dna .
these result could only be explain if dna replicate in a semiconservative manner .
therefore , the other two model be rule out .
as a result of this experiment , - pron - now know that during dna replication , each of the two strand that make up the double helix serve as a template from which new strand be copy .
the new strand will be complementary to the parental or " old " strand .
the result dna molecule have the same sequence and be divide equally into the two daughter cell .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
four  four  nine figure one  one  .  five meselson and stahl experiment with e . coli grow first in heavy nitrogen ( one  five n ) then in one  four n . dna grow in one  five n ( blue band ) be heavy than dna grow in one  four n ( red band ) , and sediment to a low level on ultracentrifugation .
after one round of replication , the dna sediment halfway between the one  five n and one  four n level ( purple band ) , rule out the conservative model of replication .
after a second round of replication , the dispersive model of replication be rule out .
these datum support the semiconservative replication model .

what would have be the conclusion of meselson and stahl 's experiment if , after the first generation , - pron - have find two band of dna ?
dna replication in bacteria dna replication have be well study in bacteria primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutant that be available .
e . coli have four  .  six million base pair ( mbp ) in a single circular chromosome and all of - pron - be replicate in approximately four  two minute , start from a single origin of replication and proceed around the circle bidirectionally ( i . e . , in both direction ) .
this mean that approximately one  zero  zero  zero nucleotide be add per second .
the process be quite rapid and occur with few error .
dna replication use a large number of protein and enzyme ( table one  one  .  one ) .
one of the key player be the enzyme dna polymerase , also know as dna pol .
in bacteria , three main type of dna polymerase be know  dna pol i , dna pol ii , and dna pol iii .
- pron - be now know that dna pol iii be the enzyme require for dna synthesis  dna pol i and dna pol ii be primarily require for repair .
dna pol iii add deoxyribonucleotide each complementary to a nucleotide on the template strand , one by one to the three ' - oh group of the grow dna chain .
the addition of these four  five  zero chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five nucleotide require energy .
this energy be present in the bond of three phosphate group attach to each nucleotide ( a triphosphate nucleotide ) , similar to how energy be store in the phosphate bond of adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) ( figure one  one  .  six ) .
when the bond between the phosphate be break and diphosphate be release , the energy release allow for the formation of a covalent phosphodiest bond by dehydration synthesis between the incoming nucleotide and the free three ' - oh group on the grow dna strand .
figure one  one  .  six
this structure show the guanosine triphosphate deoxyribonucleotide that be incorporate into a grow dna strand by cleave the two end phosphate group from the molecule and transfer the energy to the sugar phosphate bond .
the other three nucleotide form analogous structure .
initiation
the initiation of replication occur at specific nucleotide sequence call the origin of replication , where various protein bind to begin the replication process .
e . coli have a single origin of replication ( as do most prokaryote ) , call oric , on - pron - one chromosome .
the origin of replication be approximately two  four  five base pair long and be rich in adeninethymine ( at ) sequence .
some of the protein that bind to the origin of replication be important in make single - strand region of dna accessible for replication .
chromosomal dna be typically wrap around histone ( in eukaryote and archaea ) or histone - like protein ( in bacteria ) , and be supercoiled , or extensively wrap and twist on - pron - .
this packaging make the information in the dna molecule inaccessible .
however , enzyme call topoisomerase change the shape and supercoiling of the chromosome .
for bacterial dna replication to begin , the supercoiled chromosome be relax by topoisomerase ii , also call dna gyrase .
an enzyme call helicase then separate the dna strand by break the hydrogen bond between the nitrogenous base pair .
recall that at sequence have few hydrogen bond and , hence , have weak interaction than guanine - cytosine ( gc ) sequence .
these enzyme require atp hydrolysis .
as the dna open up , y - shape structure call replication fork be form .
two replication fork be form at the origin of replication , allow for bidirectional replication and formation of a structure that look like a bubble when view with a transmission electron microscope  as a result , this structure be call a replication bubble .
the dna near each replication fork be coat with single - strand bind protein to prevent the singlestrande dna from rewinde into a double helix .
once single - strand dna be accessible at the origin of replication , dna replication can begin .
however , dna pol iii be able to add nucleotide only in the five ' to three ' direction ( a new dna strand can be only extend in this direction ) .
this be because dna polymerase require a free three ' - oh group to which - pron - can add nucleotide by form a covalent phosphodiest bond between the three ' - oh end and the five ' phosphate of the next nucleotide .
this also mean that - pron - can not add nucleotide if a free three ' - oh group be not available , which be the case for a single strand of dna .
the problem be solve with the help of an rna sequence that provide the free three ' - oh end .
because this sequence allow the start of dna synthesis , - pron - be appropriately call the primer .
the primer be five to one  zero nucleotide long and complementary to the parental or template dna .
- pron - be synthesize by rna primase , which be an rna polymerase .
unlike dna polymerase , rna polymerase do not need a free three ' - oh group to synthesize an rna molecule .
now that the primer provide the free three ' - oh group , dna polymerase iii can now extend this rna primer , add dna nucleotide one by one that be complementary to the template strand ( figure one  one  .  four ) .
elongation
during elongation in dna replication , the addition of nucleotide occur at - pron - maximal rate of about one  zero  zero  zero nucleotide per second .
dna polymerase iii can only extend in the five ' to three ' direction , which pose a problem at chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  five  one the replication fork .
the dna double helix be antiparallel  that is , one strand be orient in the five ' to three ' direction and the other be orient in the three ' to five ' direction ( see structure and function of dna ) .
during replication , one strand , which be complementary to the three ' to five ' parental dna strand , be synthesize continuously toward the replication fork because polymerase can add nucleotide in this direction .
this continuously synthesize strand be know as the lead strand .
the other strand , complementary to the five ' to three ' parental dna , grow away from the replication fork , so the polymerase must move back toward the replication fork to begin add basis to a new primer , again in the direction away from the replication fork .
- pron - do so until - pron - bump into the previously synthesize strand and then - pron - move back again ( figure one  one  .  seven ) .
these step produce small dna sequence fragment know as okazaki fragment , each separate by rna primer .
okazaki fragment be name after the japanese research team and married couple reiji and tsuneko okazaki , who first discover - pron - in one  nine  six  six .
the strand with the okazaki fragment be know as the lag strand , and - pron - synthesis be say to be discontinuous .
the lead strand can be extend from one primer alone , whereas the lag strand need a new primer for each of the short okazaki fragment .
the overall direction of the lag strand will be three ' to five ' , and that of the lead strand five ' to three ' .
a protein call the sliding clamp hold the dna polymerase in place as - pron - continue to add nucleotide .
the slide clamp be a ring - shape protein that bind to the dna and hold the polymerase in place .
beyond - pron - role in initiation , topoisomerase also prevent the overwinding of the dna double helix ahead of the replication fork as the dna be open up  - pron - do so by cause temporary nick in the dna helix and then reseal - pron - .
as synthesis proceed , the rna primer be replace by dna .
the primer be remove by the exonuclease activity of dna polymerase i , and the gap be fill in .
the nick that remain between the newly synthesize dna ( that replace the rna primer ) and the previously synthesize dna be seal by the enzyme dna ligase that catalyze the formation of covalent phosphodiest linkage between the three ' - oh end of one dna fragment and the five ' phosphate end of the other fragment , stabilize the sugar - phosphate backbone of the dna molecule .
four  five  two chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  seven
at the origin of replication , topoisomerase ii relax the supercoiled chromosome .
two replication fork be form by the opening of the double - strand dna at the origin , and helicase separate the dna strand , which be coat by single - strand bind protein to keep the strand separate .
dna replication occur in both direction .
an rna primer complementary to the parental strand be synthesize by rna primase and be elongate by dna polymerase iii through the addition of nucleotide to the three ' - oh end .
on the lead strand , dna be synthesize continuously , whereas on the lag strand , dna be synthesize in short stretch call okazaki fragment .
rna primer within the lag strand be remove by the exonuclease activity of dna polymerase i , and the okazaki fragment be join by dna ligase .
termination
once the complete chromosome have be replicate , termination of dna replication must occur .
although much be know about initiation of replication , less be know about the termination process .
follow replication , the result complete circular genome of prokaryote be concatenate , mean that the circular dna chromosome be interlock and must be separate from each other .
this be accomplish through the activity of bacterial topoisomerase iv , which introduce double - strand break into dna molecule , allow - pron - to separate from each other  the enzyme then reseal the circular chromosome .
the resolution of concatemer be an issue unique to prokaryotic dna replication because of - pron - circular chromosome .
because both bacterial dna gyrase and topoisomerase iv be distinct from - pron - eukaryotic counterpart , these enzyme serve as target for a class of antimicrobial drug call quinolone .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  five  three
the molecular machinery involve in bacterial dna replication enzyme or factor function dna pol i exonuclease activity remove rna primer and replace - pron - with newly synthesize dna dna pol iii main enzyme that add nucleotide in the five ' to three ' direction helicase open the dna helix by break hydrogen bond between the nitrogenous basis ligase seals the gap between the okazaki fragment on the lag strand to create one continuous dna strand primase synthesizes rna primer need to start replication singlestrande bind protein bind to single - strand dna to prevent hydrogen bonding between dna strand , reform double - strand dna sliding clamp helps hold dna pol iii in place when nucleotide be be add topoisomerase ii ( dna gyrase )
relaxes supercoile chromosome to make dna more accessible for the initiation of replication  help relieve the stress on dna when unwinding , by cause break and then reseal the dna topoisomerase iv introduce single - strand break into concatenate chromosome to release - pron - from each other , and then reseal the dna table one  one  .  one 
which enzyme break the hydrogen bond hold the two strand of dna together so that replication can occur ?

be - pron - the lag strand or the lead strand that be synthesize in the direction toward the opening of the replication fork ?

which enzyme be responsible for remove the rna primer in newly replicate bacterial dna ?
dna replication in eukaryotes eukaryotic genome be much more complex and large than prokaryotic genome and be typically compose of multiple linear chromosome ( table one  one  .  two ) .
the human genome , for example , have three billion base pair per haploid set of chromosome , and six billion base pair be insert during replication .
there be multiple origin of replication on each eukaryotic chromosome ( figure one  one  .  eight )  the human genome have three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero to five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero origin of replication .
the rate of replication be approximately one  zero  zero nucleotide per second- one  zero time slow than prokaryotic replication .
four  five  four chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  eight eukaryotic chromosome be typically linear , and each contain multiple origin of replication .
the essential step of replication in eukaryote be the same as in prokaryote .
before replication can start , the dna have to be make available as a template .
eukaryotic dna be highly supercoiled and package , which be facilitate by many protein , include histone ( see structure and function of cellular genomes ) .
at the origin of replication , a prereplication complex compose of several protein , include helicase , form and recruit other enzyme involve in the initiation of replication , include topoisomerase to relax supercoile , single - strand bind protein , rna primase , and dna polymerase .
follow initiation of replication , in a process similar to that find in prokaryote , elongation be facilitate by eukaryotic dna polymerase .
the lead strand be continuously synthesize by the eukaryotic polymerase enzyme pol δ , while the lag strand be synthesize by pol ε .
a slide clamp protein hold the dna polymerase in place so that - pron - do not fall off the dna .
the enzyme ribonuclease h ( rnase h ) , instead of a dna polymerase as in bacteria , remove the rna primer , which be then replace with dna nucleotide .
the gap that remain be seal by dna ligase .
because eukaryotic chromosome be linear , one may expect that - pron - replication would be more straightforward .
as in prokaryote , the eukaryotic dna polymerase can add nucleotide only in the five ' to three ' direction .
in the lead strand , synthesis continue until - pron - reach either the end of the chromosome or another replication fork progress in the opposite direction .
on the lag strand , dna be synthesize in short stretch , each of which be initiate by a separate primer .
when the replication fork reach the end of the linear chromosome , there be no place to make a primer for the dna fragment to be copy at the end of the chromosome .
these end thus remain unpaired and , over time , - pron - may get progressively short as cell continue to divide .
the end of the linear chromosome be know as telomere and consist of noncode repetitive sequence .
the telomere protect coding sequence from be lose as cell continue to divide .
in human , a six base - pair sequence , ttaggg , be repeat one  zero  zero to one  zero  zero  zero time to form the telomere .
the discovery of the enzyme telomerase ( figure one  one  .  nine ) clarify - pron - understanding of how chromosome end be maintain .
telomerase contain a catalytic part and a build - in rna template .
- pron - attach to the end of the chromosome , and complementary basis to the rna template be add on the three ' end of the dna strand .
once the three ' end of the lag strand template be sufficiently elongate , dna polymerase can add the nucleotide complementary to the end of the chromosome .
in this way , the end of the chromosome be replicate .
in human , telomerase be typically active in germ cell and adult stem cell  - pron - be not active in adult somatic cell and may be associate with the aging of these cell .
eukaryotic microbe include fungus and protozoan also produce telomerase to maintain chromosomal integrity .
for - pron - discovery of telomerase and - pron - action , elizabeth blackburn ( one  nine  four  eight – ) receive the nobel prize for medicine or physiology in two  zero  zero  nine .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  five  five figure one  one  .  nine
in eukaryote , the end of the linear chromosome be maintain by the action of the telomerase enzyme .
comparison of bacterial and eukaryotic replication property bacteria eukaryotes
genome structure single circular chromosome
multiple linear chromosome
number of origin per chromosome single multiple rate of replication one  zero  zero  zero nucleotide per second one  zero  zero nucleotide per second telomerase not present
present rna primer removal dna pol i rnase h strand elongation dna pol iii pol δ ,
pol ε table one  one  .  two four  five  six chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
this animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two dnareplicani ) illustrate the process of dna replication .

how do the origin of replication differ between eukaryote and prokaryote ?

what polymerase enzyme be responsible for dna synthesis during eukaryotic replication ?

what be find at the end of the chromosome in eukaryote and why ?
dna replication of extrachromosomal elements 
plasmids and viruses to copy - pron - nucleic acid , plasmid and virus frequently use variation on the pattern of dna replication describe for prokaryote genome .
for more information on the wide range of viral replication strategy , see the viral life cycle .
roll circle replication
whereas many bacterial plasmid ( see unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells ) replicate by a process similar to that use to copy the bacterial chromosome , other plasmid , several bacteriophage , and some virus of eukaryote use roll circle replication ( figure one  one  .  one  zero ) .
the circular nature of plasmid and the circularization of some viral genome on infection make this possible .
roll circle replication begin with the enzymatic nicking of one strand of the double - strand circular molecule at the double - strand origin ( dso ) site .
in bacteria , dna polymerase iii bind to the three ' - oh group of the nicked strand and begin to unidirectionally replicate the dna use the un - nicked strand as a template , displace the nick strand as - pron - do so .
completion of dna replication at the site of the original nick result in full displacement of the nicked strand , which may then recircularize into a singlestrande dna molecule .
rna primase then synthesize a primer to initiate dna replication at the single - strand origin ( sso ) site of the single - strand dna ( ssdna ) molecule , result in a double - strand dna ( dsdna ) molecule identical to the other circular dna molecule .
link to learn chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  five  seven figure one  one  .  one  zero
the process of roll circle replication result in the synthesis of a single new copy of the circular dna molecule , as show here .

be there a lag strand in roll circle replication ?
why or why not ?
one  one  .  three rna
transcription learning objectives
 explain how rna be synthesize use dna as a template  distinguish between transcription in prokaryote and eukaryote
during the process of transcription , the information encode within the dna sequence of one or more gene be transcribe into a strand of rna , also call an rna transcript .
the result single - strand rna molecule , compose of ribonucleotide contain the basis adenine ( a ) , cytosine ( c ) , guanine ( g ) , and uracil ( u ) , act as a mobile molecular copy of the original dna sequence .
transcription in prokaryote and in eukaryote require the dna double helix to partially unwind in the region of rna synthesis .
the unwound region be call a transcription bubble .
transcription of a particular gene always proceed from one of the two dna strand that act as a template , the so - call antisense strand .
the rna product be complementary to the template strand of dna and be almost identical to the nontemplate dna strand , or the sense strand .
the only difference be that in rna , all of the t nucleotide be replace with u nucleotide  during rna synthesis , u be incorporate when there be an a in the complementary antisense strand .
transcription in bacteria bacteria use the same rna polymerase to transcribe all of - pron - gene .
like dna polymerase , rna polymerase add nucleotides one by one to the three ' - oh group of the grow nucleotide chain .
one critical difference in activity between dna polymerase and rna polymerase be the requirement for a three ' - oh onto which to add nucleotide  dna polymerase require such a three ' - oh group , thus necessitate a primer , whereas rna polymerase do not .
during four  five  eight chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five transcription , a ribonucleotide complementary to the dna template strand be add to the grow rna strand and a covalent phosphodiest bond be form by dehydration synthesis between the new nucleotide and the last one add .
in e . coli , rna polymerase comprise six polypeptide subunit , five of which compose the polymerase core enzyme responsible for add rna nucleotide to a grow strand .
the sixth subunit be know as sigma ( σ ) .
the σ factor enable rna polymerase to bind to a specific promoter , thus allow for the transcription of various gene .
there be various σ factor that allow for transcription of various gene .
initiation
the initiation of transcription begin at a promoter , a dna sequence onto which the transcription machinery bind and initiate transcription .
the nucleotide pair in the dna double helix that correspond to the site from which the first five ' rna nucleotide be transcribe be the initiation site .
nucleotide precede the initiation site be designate " upstream , " whereas nucleotide follow the initiation site be call " downstream " nucleotide .
in most case , promoter be locate just upstream of the gene - pron - regulate .
although promoter sequence vary among bacterial genome , a few element be conserve .
at the – one  zero and – three  five position within the dna prior to the initiation site ( designate + one ) , there be two promoter consensus sequence , or region that be similar across all promoter and across various bacterial specie .
the – one  zero consensus sequence , call the tata box , be tataat .
the – three  five sequence be recognize and bind by σ .
elongation
the elongation in transcription phase begin when the σ subunit dissociate from the polymerase , allow the core enzyme to synthesize rna complementary to the dna template in a five ' to three ' direction at a rate of approximately four  zero nucleotide per second .
as elongation proceed , the dna be continuously unwind ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind - pron - ( figure one  one  .  one  one ) .
figure one  one  .  one  one
during elongation , the bacterial rna polymerase track along the dna template , synthesize mrna in the five ' to three ' direction , and unwind and rewind the dna as - pron - be read .
termination
once a gene be transcribe , the bacterial polymerase must dissociate from the dna template and liberate the newly make rna .
this be refer to as termination of transcription .
the dna template include repeat nucleotide sequence that act as termination signal , cause rna polymerase to stall and release from the dna template , free the rna transcript .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  five  nine

where do σ factor of rna polymerase bind dna to start transcription ?

what occur to initiate the polymerization activity of rna polymerase ?

where do the signal to end transcription come from ?
transcription in eukaryotes prokaryotes and eukaryote perform fundamentally the same process of transcription , with a few significant difference ( see table one  one  .  three ) .
eukaryote use three different polymerase , rna polymerase i , ii , and iii , all structurally distinct from the bacterial rna polymerase .
each transcribe a different subset of gene .
interestingly , archaea contain a single rna polymerase that be more closely related to eukaryotic rna polymerase ii than to - pron - bacterial counterpart .
eukaryotic mrnas be also usually monocistronic , mean that - pron - each encode only a single polypeptide , whereas prokaryotic mrnas of bacteria and archaea be commonly polycistronic , mean that - pron - encode multiple polypeptide .
the most important difference between prokaryote and eukaryote be the latter 's membrane - bind nucleus , which influence the ease of use of rna molecule for protein synthesis .
with the gene bind in a nucleus , the eukaryotic cell must transport protein - encode rna molecule to the cytoplasm to be translate .
protein - encode primary transcript , the rna molecule directly synthesize by rna polymerase , must undergo several processing step to protect these rna molecule from degradation during the time - pron - be transfer from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and translate into a protein .
for example , eukaryotic mrnas may last for several hour , whereas the typical prokaryotic mrna last no more than five second .
the primary transcript ( also call pre - mrna ) be first coat with rna - stabilize protein to protect - pron - from degradation while - pron - be process and export out of the nucleus .
the first type of processing begin while the primary transcript be still be synthesize  a special seven  - methylguanosine nucleotide , call the five ' cap , be add to the five ' end of the grow transcript .
in addition to prevent degradation , factor involve in subsequent protein synthesis recognize the cap , which help initiate translation by ribosome .
once elongation be complete , another processing enzyme then add a string of approximately two  zero  zero adenine nucleotide to the three ' end , call the poly - a tail .
this modification further protect the pre - mrna from degradation and signal to cellular factor that the transcript need to be export to the cytoplasm .
eukaryotic gene that encode polypeptide be compose of code sequence call exon ( ex - on signifie that - pron - be express ) and intervene sequence call intron ( int - ron denote - pron - intervene role ) .
transcribed rna sequence correspond to intron do not encode region of the functional polypeptide and be remove from the premrna during processing .
- pron - be essential that all of the intron - encode rna sequence be completely and precisely remove from a pre - mrna before protein synthesis so that the exon - encode rna sequence be properly join together to code for a functional polypeptide .
if the process err by even a single nucleotide , the sequence of the rejoined exon would be shift , and the result polypeptide would be nonfunctional .
the process of remove intron - encode rna sequence and reconnecte those encode by exon be call rna splicing and be facilitate by the action of a spliceosome contain small nuclear ribonucleo protein ( snrnps ) .
intron - encode rna sequence be remove from the pre - mrna while - pron - be still in the nucleus .
although - pron - be not translate , intron appear to have various function , include gene regulation and mrna transport .
on completion of these modification , the mature transcript , the mrna that encode a polypeptide , be transport out of the nucleus , destine for the cytoplasm for translation .
intron can be splice out differently , result in various exon be include or exclude from the final mrna product .
this process be know as alternative splicing .
the advantage of alternative splicing be that different type of mrna transcript can be generate , all derive from the same dna sequence .
in recent year , - pron - have be show that some archaea also have the ability to splice - pron - pre - mrna .
four  six  zero chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five comparison of transcription in bacteria versus eukaryotes property bacteria eukaryotes number of polypeptide encode per mrna monocistronic or polycistronic exclusively monocistronic strand elongation core
+
σ = holoenzyme rna polymerase i , ii , or iii addition of five ' cap
no yes addition of three '
poly - a tail
no
yes splicing of
pre - mrna no
yes table
one  one  .  three visualize how mrna splice ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two mrnasplice ) happen by watch the process in action in this video .
see how intron be remove during rna splice ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two rnasplice ) here .

in eukaryotic cell , how be the rna transcript from a gene for a protein modify after - pron - be transcribe ?

do exon or intron contain information for protein sequence ?
part two
in the emergency department , a nurse tell mark that - pron - have make a good decision to come to the hospital because - pron - symptom indicate an infection that have get out of control .
mark 's symptom have progress , with the area of skin affect and the amount of swell increase .
within the affected area , a rash have begin , blistering and small gas pocket underneath the outermost layer of skin have form , and some of the skin be become gray .
base on the putrid smell of the pus draining from one of the blister , the rapid progression of the infection , and the visual appearance of the affected skin , the physician immediately begin treatment for necrotize fasciitis .
mark 's physician order a culture of the fluid draining from the blister and also order blood work , include a white blood cell count .
mark be admit to the intensive care unit and begin intravenous administration of a broad - spectrum antibiotic to try to minimize further spread of the infection .
despite antibiotic therapy , mark 's condition deteriorate quickly .
mark become confused and dizzy .
within a few hour of - pron - hospital admission , - pron - blood pressure drop significantly and - pron - breathing become shallow and more rapid .
additionally , blistering increase , with the blister intensify in color to purplish black , and the wound - pron - seem to be progress rapidly up mark 's leg .

what be possible causative agent of mark 's necrotize fasciitis ?
link to learn clinical focus chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  six  one

what be some possible explanation for why the antibiotic treatment do not seem to be work ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  one  .  four protein synthesis ( translation )
learning objectives
 describe the genetic code and explain why - pron - be consider almost universal

explain the process of translation and the function of the molecular machinery of translation 
compare translation in eukaryote and prokaryote the synthesis of protein consume more of a cell 's energy than any other metabolic process .
in turn , protein account for more mass than any other macromolecule of live organism .
- pron - perform virtually every function of a cell , serve as both functional ( e . g . , enzymes ) and structural element .
the process of translation , or protein synthesis , the second part of gene expression , involve the decoding by a ribosome of an mrna message into a polypeptide product .
the genetic code translation of the mrna template convert nucleotide - base genetic information into the “ language " of amino acid to create a protein product .
a protein sequence consist of two  zero commonly occur amino acid .
each amino acid be define within the mrna by a triplet of nucleotide call a codon .
the relationship between an mrna codon and - pron - correspond amino acid be call the genetic code .
the three - nucleotide code mean that there be a total of six  four possible combination ( four  three , with four different nucleotide possible at each of the three different position within the codon ) .
this number be great than the number of amino acid and a give amino acid be encode by more than one codon ( figure one  one  .  one  two ) .
this redundancy in the genetic code be call degeneracy .
typically , whereas the first two position in a codon be important for determine which amino acid will be incorporate into a grow polypeptide ,
the third position , call the wobble position , be less critical .
in some case , if the nucleotide in the third position be change , the same amino acid be still incorporate .
whereas six  one of the six  four possible triplet code for amino acid , three of the six  four codon do not code for an amino acid  - pron - terminate protein synthesis , release the polypeptide from the translation machinery .
these be call stop codon or nonsense codon .
another codon , aug , also have a special function .
in addition to specify the amino acid methionine , - pron - also typically serve as the start codon to initiate translation .
the reading frame , the way nucleotide in mrna be group into codon , for translation be set by the aug start codon near the five ' end of the mrna .
each set of three nucleotide follow this start codon be a codon in the mrna message .
the genetic code be nearly universal .
with a few exception , virtually all specie use the same genetic code for protein synthesis , which be powerful evidence that all extant life on earth share a common origin .
however , unusual amino acid such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine have be observe in archaea and bacteria .
in the case of selenocysteine , the codon use be uga ( normally a stop codon ) .
however , uga can encode for selenocysteine use a stem - loop structure ( know as the selenocysteine insertion sequence , or secis element ) , which be find at the three ' untranslated region of the mrna .
pyrrolysine use a different stop codon , uag .
the incorporation of pyrrolysine require the pyl gene and a unique transfer rna ( trna ) with a cua anticodon .
four  six  two chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  one  two
this figure show the genetic code for translate each nucleotide triplet in mrna into an amino acid or a termination signal in a nascent protein .
the first letter of a codon be show vertically on the left , the second letter of a codon be show horizontally across the top , and the third letter of a codon be show vertically on the right .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes of health )
 how many basis be in each codon ?

what amino acid be code for by the codon aau ?

what happen when a stop codon be reach ?
the protein synthesis machinery
in addition to the mrna template , many molecule and macromolecule contribute to the process of translation .
the composition of each component vary across taxa  for instance , ribosome may consist of different number of ribosomal rnas ( rrnas ) and polypeptide depend on the organism .
however , the general structure and function of the protein synthesis machinery be comparable from bacteria to human cell .
translation require the input of an mrna template , ribosome , trnas , and various enzymatic factor .
ribosomes
a ribosome be a complex macromolecule compose of catalytic rrnas ( call ribozyme ) and structural rrnas , as well as many distinct polypeptide .
mature rrnas make up approximately five  zero % of each ribosome .
prokaryote have seven  zero s ribosome , whereas eukaryote have eight  zero s ribosome in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum , and seven  zero s ribosome in mitochondria and chloroplast .
ribosome dissociate into large and small subunit when - pron - be not synthesize protein and reassociate during the initiation of translation .
in e . coli , the small subunit be describe as three  zero s ( which contain the one  six s rrna subunit ) , and the large subunit be five  zero s ( which contain the five s and two  three s rrna subunit ) , for a total of seven  zero s ( svedberg unit be not additive ) .
eukaryote ribosome have a small four  zero s subunit ( which contain the one  eight s rrna subunit ) and a large six  zero s subunit ( which contain the five s , five  .  eight s and two  eight s rrna subunit ) , for a total of eight  zero s .
the small subunit be responsible for bind the mrna template , whereas the large subunit bind trnas chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  six  three ( discuss in the next subsection ) .
each mrna molecule be simultaneously translate by many ribosome , all synthesize protein in the same direction  read the mrna from five ' to three ' and synthesize the polypeptide from the n terminus to the c terminus .
the complete structure contain an mrna with multiple associate ribosome be call a polyribosome ( or polysome ) .
in both bacteria and archaea , before transcriptional termination occur , each protein - encode transcript be already be use to begin synthesis of numerous copy of the encode polypeptide ( s ) because the process of transcription and translation can occur concurrently , form polyribosome ( figure one  one  .  one  three ) .
the reason why transcription and translation can occur simultaneously be because both of these process occur in the same five ' to three ' direction , - pron - both occur in the cytoplasm of the cell , and because the rna transcript be not process once - pron - be transcribe .
this allow a prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal require new protein very quickly .
in contrast , in eukaryotic cell , simultaneous transcription and translation be not possible .
although polyribosome also form in eukaryote , - pron - can not do so until rna synthesis be complete and the rna molecule have be modify and transport out of the nucleus .
figure one  one  .  one  three
in prokaryote , multiple rna polymerase can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosome concurrently translate the mrna transcript into polypeptide .
in this way , a specific protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell .
transfer rna transfer rna ( trnas ) be structural rna molecule and , depend on the specie , many different type of trnas exist in the cytoplasm .
bacterial specie typically have between six  zero and nine  zero type .
serve as adaptor , each trna type bind to a specific codon on the mrna template and add the correspond amino acid to the polypeptide chain .
therefore , trnas be the molecule that actually " translate " the language of rna into the language of protein .
as the adaptor molecule of translation , - pron - be surprising that trnas can fit so much specificity into such a small package .
the trna molecule interact with three factor  aminoacyl trna synthetase , ribosome , and mrna .
mature trnas take on a three - dimensional structure when complementary basis expose in the single - strand rna molecule hydrogen bond with each other ( figure one  one  .  one  four ) .
this shape position the amino - acid binding site , call the cca amino acid bind end , which be a cytosine - cytosine - adenine sequence at the three ' end of the trna , and the anticodon at the other end .
the anticodon be a three - nucleotide sequence that bond with an mrna codon through complementary base pair .
an amino acid be add to the end of a trna molecule through the process of trna “ charge , " during which each trna molecule be link to - pron - correct or cognate amino acid by a group of enzyme call aminoacyl trna synthetase .
at least one type of aminoacyl trna synthetase exist for each of the two  zero amino acid .
during this process , the amino acid be first activate by the addition of adenosine monophosphate ( amp ) and then transfer to the trna , make - pron - a charged trna , and amp be release .
four  six  four chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  one  four ( a )
after folding cause by intramolecular base pair , a trna molecule have one end that contain the anticodon , which interact with the mrna codon , and the cca amino acid bind end .
( b )
a space - filling model be helpful for visualize the three - dimensional shape of trna .
( c ) simplify model be useful when draw complex process such as protein synthesis .

describe the structure and composition of the prokaryotic ribosome .

in what direction be the mrna template read ?

describe the structure and function of a trna .
the mechanism of protein synthesis translation be similar in prokaryote and eukaryote .
here - pron - will explore how translation occur in e . coli , a representative prokaryote , and specify any difference between bacterial and eukaryotic translation .
initiation
the initiation of protein synthesis begin with the formation of an initiation complex .
in e . coli , this complex involve the small three  zero s ribosome , the mrna template , three initiation factor that help the ribosome assemble correctly , guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) that act as an energy source , and a special initiator trna carry n - formylmethionine ( fmet - trnafmet )
( figure one  one  .  one  five ) .
the initiator trna interact with the start codon aug of the mrna and carry a formylated methionine ( fmet ) .
because of - pron - involvement in initiation , fmet be insert at the beginning ( n terminus ) of every polypeptide chain synthesize by e . coli .
in e . coli mrna , a leader sequence upstream of the first aug codon , call the shine - dalgarno sequence ( also know as the ribosomal binding site aggagg ) , interact through complementary base pair with the rrna molecule that compose the ribosome .
this interaction anchor the three  zero s ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mrna template .
at this point , the five  zero s ribosomal subunit then bind to the initiation complex , form an intact ribosome .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
four  six  five
in eukaryote , initiation complex formation be similar , with the following difference 

the initiator trna be a different specialized trna carry methionine , call met - trnai

instead of bind to the mrna at the shine - dalgarno sequence , the eukaryotic initiation complex recognize the five ' cap of the eukaryotic mrna , then track along the mrna in the five ' to three ' direction until the aug start codon be recognize .
at this point , the six  zero s subunit bind to the complex of met - trnai , mrna , and the four  zero s subunit .
figure one  one  .  one  five translation in bacteria begin with the formation of the initiation complex , which include the small ribosomal subunit , the mrna , the initiator trna carry n - formyl - methionine , and initiation factor .
then the five  zero s subunit bind , form an intact ribosome .
elongation
in prokaryote and eukaryote , the basic of elongation of translation be the same .
in e . coli , the binding of the five  zero s ribosomal subunit to produce the intact ribosome form three functionally important ribosomal site  the a ( aminoacyl ) site bind incoming charge aminoacyl trnas .
the p ( peptidyl ) site bind charge trnas carry amino acid that have form peptide bond with the grow polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociate from - pron - correspond trna .
the e ( exit ) site release dissociate trnas so that - pron - can be recharge with free amino acid .
there be one notable exception to this assembly line of trnas 
during initiation complex formation , bacterial fmet−trnafmet or eukaryotic met - trnai enter the p site directly without first enter the a site , provide a free a site ready to accept the trna correspond to the first codon after the aug .
elongation proceed with single - codon movement of the ribosome each call a translocation event .
during each translocation event , the charge trnas enter at the a site , then shift to the p site , and then finally to the e site for removal .
ribosomal movement , or step , be induce by conformational change that advance the ribosome by three four  six  six chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five basis in the three ' direction .
peptide bond form between the amino group of the amino acid attach to the a - site trna and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attach to the p - site trna .
the formation of each peptide bond be catalyze by peptidyl transferase , an rna - base ribozyme that be integrate into the five  zero s ribosomal subunit .
the amino acid bind to the p - site trna be also link to the grow polypeptide chain .
as the ribosome step across the mrna , the former p - site trna enter the e site , detach from the amino acid , and be expel .
several of the step during elongation , include bind of a charge aminoacyl trna to the a site and translocation , require energy derive from gtp hydrolysis , which be catalyze by specific elongation factor .
amazingly , the e . coli translation apparatus take only zero  .  zero  five second to add each amino acid , mean that a two  zero  zero amino - acid protein can be translate in just one  zero second .
termination
the termination of translation occur when a nonsense codon ( uaa , uag , or uga ) be encounter for which there be no complementary trna .
on align with the a site , these nonsense codon be recognize by release factor in prokaryote and eukaryote that result in the p - site amino acid detach from - pron - trna , release the newly make polypeptide .
the small and large ribosomal subunit dissociate from the mrna and from each other  - pron - be recruit almost immediately into another translation initiation complex .
in summary , there be several key feature that distinguish prokaryotic gene expression from that see in eukaryote .
these be illustrate in figure one  one  .  one  six and list in figure one  one  .  one  seven .
figure one  one  .  one  six
( a )
in prokaryote , the process of transcription and translation occur simultaneously in the cytoplasm , allow for a rapid cellular response to an environmental cue .
( b )
in eukaryote , transcription be localize to the nucleus and translation be localize to the cytoplasm , separate these process and necessitate rna processing for stability .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
four  six  seven figure one  one  .  one  seven protein targeting , folding , and modification during and after translation , polypeptide may need to be modify before - pron - be biologically active .
posttranslational modification include  one . removal of translate signal sequence - short tail of amino acid that aid in direct a protein to a specific cellular compartment two .
proper " folding " of the polypeptide and association of multiple polypeptide subunit , often facilitate by chaperone protein , into a distinct three - dimensional structure three . proteolytic processing of an inactive polypeptide to release an active protein component , and four . various chemical modification ( e . g . , phosphorylation , methylation , or glycosylation ) of individual amino acid .

what be the component of the initiation complex for translation in prokaryote ?

what be two difference between initiation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation ?

what occur at each of the three active site of the ribosome ?

what cause termination of translation ?
four  six  eight chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five one  one  .  five
mutation learning objectives

compare point mutation and frameshift mutation
 describe the difference between missense , nonsense , and silent mutation 
describe the difference between light and dark repair 
explain how different mutagen act 
explain why the ames test can be use to detect carcinogen

analyze sequence of dna and identify example of type of mutation
a mutation be a heritable change in the dna sequence of an organism .
the result organism , call a mutant , may have a recognizable change in phenotype compare to the wild type , which be the phenotype most commonly observe in nature .
a change in the dna sequence be conferred to mrna through transcription , and may lead to an altered amino acid sequence in a protein on translation .
because protein carry out the vast majority of cellular function , a change in amino acid sequence in a protein may lead to an altered phenotype for the cell and organism .
effect of mutations on dna sequence
there be several type of mutation that be classify accord to how the dna molecule be alter .
one type , call a point mutation , affect a single base and most commonly occur when one base be substitute or replace by another .
mutation also result from the addition of one or more basis , know as an insertion , or the removal of one or more basis , know as a deletion .

what type of a mutation occur when a gene have two few nucleotide in - pron - sequence ?
effect of mutations on protein structure and function point mutation may have a wide range of effect on protein function ( figure one  one  .  one  eight ) .
as a consequence of the degeneracy of the genetic code , a point mutation will commonly result in the same amino acid be incorporate into the result polypeptide despite the sequence change .
this change would have no effect on the protein 's structure , and be thus call a silent mutation .
a missense mutation result in a different amino acid be incorporate into the result polypeptide .
the effect of a missense mutation depend on how chemically different the new amino acid be from the wild - type amino acid .
the location of the change amino acid within the protein also be important .
for example , if the change amino acid be part of the enzyme 's active site , then the effect of the missense mutation may be significant .
many missense mutation result in protein that be still functional , at least to some degree .
sometimes the effect of missense mutation may be only apparent under certain environmental condition  such missense mutation be call conditional mutation .
rarely , a missense mutation may be beneficial .
under the right environmental condition , this type of mutation may give the organism that harbor - pron - a selective advantage .
yet another type of point mutation , call a nonsense mutation , convert a codon encode an amino acid ( a sense codon ) into a stop codon ( a nonsense codon ) .
nonsense mutation result in the synthesis of protein that be short than the wild type and typically not functional .
deletion and insertion also cause various effect .
because codon be triplet of nucleotide , insertion or deletion in group of three nucleotide may lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more amino acid and may not cause significant effect on the result protein 's functionality .
however , frameshift mutation , cause by insertion or deletion of a number of nucleotide that be not a multiple of three be extremely problematic because a shift in the chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  six  nine read frame result ( figure one  one  .  one  eight ) .
because ribosome read the mrna in triplet codon , frameshift mutation can change every amino acid after the point of the mutation .
the new reading frame may also include a stop codon before the end of the code sequence .
consequently , protein make from gene contain frameshift mutation be nearly always nonfunctional .
figure one  one  .  one  eight
mutation can lead to change in the protein sequence encode by the dna .

what be the reason a nucleotide change in a gene for a protein may not have any effect on the phenotype of that gene ?

be - pron - possible for an insertion of three nucleotide together after the fifth nucleotide in a protein - code gene to produce a protein that be short than normal ?
how or how not ?
four  seven  zero chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five a beneficial mutation since the first case of infection with human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) be report in one  nine  eight  one , nearly four  zero million people have die from hiv infection , [ two ] the virus that cause acquire immune deficiency syndrome ( aids ) .
the virus target helper t cell that play a key role in bridge the innate and adaptive immune response , infect and kill cell normally involve in the body 's response to infection .
there be no cure for hiv infection , but many drug have be develop to slow or block the progression of the virus .
although individual around the world may be infect , the high prevalence among people one  five – four  nine year old be in sub -
saharan africa , where nearly one person in two  zero be infect , account for great than seven  zero % of the infection worldwide[ three ] ( figure one  one  .  one  nine ) .
unfortunately , this be also a part of the world where prevention strategy and drug to treat the infection be the most lacking .
in recent year , scientific interest have be pique by the discovery of a few individual from northern europe who be resistant to hiv infection .
in one  nine  nine  eight , american geneticist stephen j . o'brien at the national institutes of health ( nih ) and colleague publish the result of - pron - genetic analysis of more than four  ,  zero  zero  zero individual .
these indicate that many individual of eurasian descent ( up to one  four % in some ethnic group ) have a deletion mutation , call ccr five  - delta three  two , in the gene encode ccr five .
ccr five be a coreceptor find on the surface of t cell that be necessary for many strain of the virus to enter the host cell .
the mutation lead to the production of a receptor to which hiv can not effectively bind and thus block viral entry .
people homozygous for this mutation have greatly reduce susceptibility to hiv infection , and those who be heterozygous have some protection from infection as well .
- pron - be not clear why people of northern european descent , specifically , carry this mutation , but - pron - prevalence seem to be high in northern europe and steadily decrease in population as one move south .
research indicate that the mutation have be present since before hiv appear and may have be select for in european population as a result of exposure to the plague or smallpox .
this mutation may protect individual from plague ( cause by the bacterium yersinia pestis ) and smallpox ( cause by the variola virus ) because this receptor may also be involve in these disease .
the age of this mutation be a matter of debate , but estimate suggest - pron - appear between one  eight  seven  five year to two  two  five year ago , and may have be spread from northern europe through viking invasion .
this exciting finding have lead to new avenue in hiv research , include look for drug to block ccr five bind to hiv in individual who lack the mutation .
although dna testing to determine which individual carry the ccr five  - delta three  two mutation be possible , there be document case of individual homozygous for the mutation contracting hiv .
for this reason , dna testing for the mutation be not widely recommend by public health official so as not to encourage risky behavior in those who carry the mutation .
nevertheless , inhibit the binding of hiv to ccr five continue to be a valid strategy for the development of drug therapy for those infect with hiv .
micro connections two .
world health organization .
“
global health observatory ( gho ) data , hiv / aids .
" http / / www . who . int / gho / hiv / en / . accessed august five , two  zero  one  six .
three .
world health organization .
“
global health observatory ( gho ) data , hiv / aids .
" http / / www . who . int / gho / hiv / en / . accessed august five , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  seven  one figure one  one  .  one  nine hiv be highly prevalent in sub - saharan africa , but - pron - prevalence be quite low in some other part of the world .
cause of mutations mistakes in the process of dna replication can cause spontaneous mutation to occur .
the error rate of dna polymerase be one incorrect base per billion base pair replicate .
exposure to mutagen can cause induce mutation , which be various type of chemical agent or radiation ( table one  one  .  four ) .
exposure to a mutagen can increase the rate of mutation more than one  zero  zero  zero  - fold .
mutagen be often also carcinogen , agent that cause cancer .
however , whereas nearly all carcinogen be mutagenic , not all mutagen be necessarily carcinogen .
chemical mutagens
various type of chemical mutagen interact directly with dna either by act as nucleoside analog or by modify nucleotide basis .
chemical call nucleoside analog be structurally similar to normal nucleotide basis and can be incorporate into dna during replication ( figure one  one  .  two  zero ) .
these base analog induce mutation because - pron - often have different base - pair rule than the basis - pron - replace .
other chemical mutagen can modify normal dna basis , result in different base - pair rule .
for example , nitrous acid deaminate cytosine , convert - pron - to uracil .
uracil then pair with adenine in a subsequent round of replication , result in the conversion of a gc base pair to an at base pair .
nitrous acid also deaminate adenine to hypoxanthine , which base pair with cytosine instead of thymine , result in the conversion of a ta base pair to a cg base pair .
chemical mutagen know as intercalate agent work differently .
these molecule slide between the stack nitrogenous basis of the dna double helix , distort the molecule and create atypical spacing between nucleotide base pair ( figure one  one  .  two  one ) .
as a result , during dna replication , dna polymerase may either skip replicate four  seven  two chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five several nucleotide ( create a deletion ) or insert extra nucleotide ( create an insertion ) .
either outcome may lead to a frameshift mutation .
combustion product like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon be particularly dangerous intercalate agent that can lead to mutation - cause cancer .
the intercalate agent ethidium bromide and acridine orange be commonly use in the laboratory to stain dna for visualization and be potential mutagen .
figure one  one  .  two  zero
( a ) two  - aminopurine nucleoside ( two ap ) structurally be a nucleoside analog to adenine nucleoside , whereas five  - bromouracil ( five bu ) be a nucleoside analog to thymine nucleoside .
two ap base pair with c , convert an at base pair to a gc base pair after several round of replication .
five bu pair with g , convert an at base pair to a gc base pair after several round of replication .
( b )
nitrous acid be a different type of chemical mutagen that modify already exist nucleoside basis like c to produce u , which base pair with a .
this chemical modification , as show here , result in convert a cg base pair to a ta base pair .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  seven  three figure one  one  .  two  one intercalate agent , such as acridine , introduce atypical spacing between base pair , result in dna polymerase introduce either a deletion or an insertion , lead to a potential frameshift mutation .
radiation exposure to either ionize or nonionize radiation can each induce mutation in dna , although by different mechanism .
strong ionize radiation like x - ray and gamma ray can cause single - and double - strand break in the dna backbone through the formation of hydroxyl radical on radiation exposure ( figure one  one  .  two  two ) .
ionize radiation can also modify basis  for example , the deamination of cytosine to uracil , analogous to the action of nitrous acid . [ four ]
ionize radiation exposure be use to kill microbe to sterilize medical device and food , because of - pron - dramatic nonspecific effect in damage dna , protein , and other cellular component ( see use physical methods to control microorganisms ) .
nonionize radiation , like ultraviolet light , be not energetic enough to initiate these type of chemical change .
however , nonionize radiation can induce dimer formation between two adjacent pyrimidine basis , commonly two thymine , within a nucleotide strand .
during thymine dimer formation , the two adjacent thymine become covalently link and , if leave unrepaired , both dna replication and transcription be stall at this point .
dna polymerase may proceed and replicate the dimer incorrectly , potentially lead to frameshift or point mutation .
four .
k . r .
tindall et al .
“
change in dna base sequence induce by gamma - ray mutagenesis of lambda phage and prophage .
"
genetic one  one  eight
no .
four ( one  nine  eight  eight  )  five  five  one – five  six  zero . four  seven  four
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  two  two
( a ) ionize radiation may lead to the formation of single - strand and double - strand break in the sugar - phosphate backbone of dna , as well as to the modification of basis ( not show ) .
( b )
nonionize radiation like ultraviolet light can lead to the formation of thymine dimer , which can stall replication and transcription and introduce frameshift or point mutation .
a summary of mutagenic agents mutagenic agents mode of action effect on dna resulting type of mutation nucleoside analog
two  - aminopurine be insert in place of a but base pair with c converts at to
gc base pair point five  - bromouracil be insert in place of t but base pair with g converts at to gc base pair point nucleotide - modify agent
nitrous oxide deaminate c to u converts gc to at base pair point intercalating agent acridine orange , ethidium bromide , polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon distorts double helix , create unusual spacing between nucleotide introduces small deletion and insertion frameshift ionizing radiation x - ray , γ - ray forms hydroxyl radical cause single - and double - strand dna break repair mechanism may introduce mutation x - ray , γ - ray modifies basis ( e . g . , deaminate c to u )
convert gc to at base pair
point nonionizing radiation ultraviolet forms pyrimidine ( usually thymine ) dimer causes dna replication error frameshift or point table one  one  .  four chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  seven  five
 how do a base analog introduce a mutation ?

how do an intercalate agent introduce a mutation ?

what type of mutagen cause thymine dimer ?
dna repair
the process of dna replication be highly accurate , but mistake can occur spontaneously or be induce by mutagen .
uncorrected mistake can lead to serious consequence for the phenotype .
cell have develop several repair mechanism to minimize the number of mutation that persist .
proofread most of the mistake introduce during dna replication be promptly correct by most dna polymerase through a function call proofread .
in proofread , the dna polymerase read the newly add base , ensure that - pron - be complementary to the corresponding base in the template strand before add the next one .
if an incorrect base have be add , the enzyme make a cut to release the wrong nucleotide and a new base be add .
mismatch repair
some error introduce during replication be correct shortly after the replication machinery have move .
this mechanism be call mismatch repair .
the enzyme involve in this mechanism recognize the incorrectly add nucleotide , excise - pron - , and replace - pron - with the correct base .
one example be the methyl - direct mismatch repair in e . coli .
the dna be hemimethylate .
this mean that the parental strand be methylate while the newly synthesize daughter strand be not .
- pron - take several minute before the new strand be methylate .
proteins muts , mutl , and muth bind to the hemimethylated site where the incorrect nucleotide be find .
muth cut the nonmethylate strand ( the new strand ) .
an exonuclease remove a portion of the strand ( include the incorrect nucleotide ) .
the gap form be then fill in by dna pol iii and ligase .
repair of thymine dimers
because the production of thymine dimer be common ( many organism can not avoid ultraviolet light ) , mechanism have evolve to repair these lesion .
in nucleotide excision repair ( also call dark repair ) , enzyme remove the pyrimidine dimer and replace - pron - with the correct nucleotide ( figure one  one  .  two  three ) .
in e . coli , the dna be scan by an enzyme complex .
if a distortion in the double helix be find that be introduce by the pyrimidine dimer , the enzyme complex cut the sugar - phosphate backbone several basis upstream and downstream of the dimer , and the segment of dna between these two cut be then enzymatically remove .
dna pol i replace the miss nucleotide with the correct one and dna ligase seal the gap in the sugar - phosphate backbone .
the direct repair ( also call light repair ) of thymine dimer occur through the process of photoreactivation in the presence of visible light .
an enzyme call photolyase recognize the distortion in the dna helix cause by the thymine dimer and bind to the dimer .
then , in the presence of visible light , the photolyase enzyme change conformation and break apart the thymine dimer , allow the thymine to again correctly base pair with the adenine on the complementary strand .
photoreactivation appear to be present in all organism , with the exception of placental mammal , include human .
photoreactivation be particularly important for organism chronically expose to ultraviolet radiation , like plant , photosynthetic bacteria , algae , and coral , to prevent the accumulation of mutation cause by thymine dimer formation .
four  seven  six chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  two  three bacteria have two mechanism for repair thymine dimer .
( a )
in nucleotide excision repair , an enzyme complex recognize the distortion in the dna complex around the thymine dimer and cut and remove the damage dna strand .
the correct nucleotide be replace by dna pol i and the nucleotide strand be seal by dna ligase .
( b )
in photoreactivation , the enzyme photolyase bind to the thymine dimer and , in the presence of visible light , break apart the dimer , restore the base pairing of the thymine with complementary adenine on the opposite dna strand .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
four  seven  seven 
during mismatch repair , how do the enzyme recognize which be the new and which be the old strand ?

how do an intercalate agent introduce a mutation ?

what type of mutation do photolyase repair ?
identify bacterial mutants one common technique use to identify bacterial mutant be call replica plating .
this technique be use to detect nutritional mutant , call auxotroph , which have a mutation in a gene encode an enzyme in the biosynthesis pathway of a specific nutrient , such as an amino acid .
as a result , whereas wild - type cell retain the ability to grow normally on a medium lack the specific nutrient , auxotroph be unable to grow on such a medium .
during replica plate ( figure one  one  .  two  four ) , a population of bacterial cell be mutagenize and then plate as individual cell on a complex nutritionally complete plate and allow to grow into colony .
cell from these colony be remove from this master plate , often use sterile velvet .
this velvet , contain cell , be then press in the same orientation onto plate of various medium .
at least one plate should also be nutritionally complete to ensure that cell be be properly transfer between the plate .
the other plate lack specific nutrient , allow the researcher to discover various auxotrophic mutant unable to produce specific nutrient .
cell from the corresponding colony on the nutritionally complete plate can be use to recover the mutant for further study .

why be cell plate on a nutritionally complete plate in addition to nutrient - deficient plate when look for a mutant ?
the ames test
the ames test , develop by bruce ames ( one  nine  two  eight – ) in the one  nine  seven  zero , be a method that use bacteria for rapid , inexpensive screening of the carcinogenic potential of new chemical compound .
the test measure the mutation rate associate with exposure to the compound , which , if elevate , may indicate that exposure to this compound be associate with great cancer risk .
the ames test use as the test organism a strain of salmonella typhimurium that be a histidine auxotroph , unable to synthesize - pron - own histidine because of a mutation in an essential gene require for - pron - synthesis .
after exposure to a potential mutagen , these bacteria be plate onto a medium lack histidine , and the number of mutant regain the ability to synthesize histidine be record and compare with the number of such mutant that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen ( figure one  one  .  two  five ) .
chemical that be more mutagenic will bring about more mutant with restore histidine synthesis in the ames test .
because many chemical be not directly mutagenic but be metabolize to mutagenic form by liver enzyme , rat liver extract be commonly include at the start of this experiment to mimic liver metabolism .
after the ames test be conduct , compound identify as mutagenic be further test for - pron - potential carcinogenic property by use other model , include animal model like mouse and rat .
four  seven  eight chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  two  four identification of auxotrophic mutant , like histidine auxotroph , be do use replica plating .
after mutagenesis , colony that grow on nutritionally complete medium but not on medium lacking histidine be identify as histidine auxotroph .
figure one  one  .  two  five
the ames test be use to identify mutagenic , potentially carcinogenic chemical .
a salmonella histidine auxotroph be use as the test strain , expose to a potential mutagen / carcinogen .
the number of reversion mutant capable of grow in the absence of supply histidine be count and compare with the number of natural reversion mutant that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen .

what mutation be use as an indicator of mutation rate in the ames test ?
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  seven  nine

why can the ames test work as a test for carcinogenicity ?
one  one  .  six
how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity learning objectives
 compare the process of transformation , transduction , and conjugation 
explain how asexual gene transfer result in prokaryotic genetic diversity 
explain the structure and consequence for bacterial genetic diversity of transposon
typically , when - pron - consider genetic transfer , - pron - think of vertical gene transfer , the transmission of genetic information from generation to generation .
vertical gene transfer be by far the main mode of transmission of genetic information in all cell .
in sexually reproduce organism , cross - over event and independent assortment of individual chromosome during meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in the population .
genetic diversity be also introduce during sexual reproduction , when the genetic information from two parent , each with different complement of genetic information , be combine , produce new combination of parental genotype in the diploid offspring .
the occurrence of mutation also contribute to genetic diversity in a population .
genetic diversity of offspring be useful in change or inconsistent environment and may be one reason for the evolutionary success of sexual reproduction .
when prokaryote and eukaryote reproduce asexually , - pron - transfer a nearly identical copy of - pron - genetic material to - pron - offspring through vertical gene transfer .
although asexual reproduction produce more offspring more quickly , any benefit of diversity among those offspring be lose .
how then do organism whose dominant reproductive mode be asexual create genetic diversity ?
in prokaryote , horizontal gene transfer ( hgt ) , the introduction of genetic material from one organism to another organism within the same generation , be an important way to introduce genetic diversity .
hgt allow even distantly relate specie to share gene , influence - pron - phenotype .
- pron - be think that hgt be more prevalent in prokaryote but that only a small fraction of the prokaryotic genome may be transfer by this type of transfer at any one time .
as the phenomenon be investigate more thoroughly , - pron - may be reveal to be even more common .
many scientist believe that hgt and mutation be significant source of genetic variation , the raw material for the process of natural selection , in prokaryote .
although hgt be more common among evolutionarily relate organism , - pron - may occur between any two specie that live together in a natural community .
hgt in prokaryote be know to occur by the three primary mechanism that be illustrate in figure one  one  .  two  six
 one .
transformation 
naked dna be take up from the environment two .
transduction 
gene be transfer between cell in a virus ( see the viral life cycle )
three .
conjugation  use of a hollow tube call a conjugation pilus to transfer gene between cell four  eight  zero chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  two  six there be three prokaryote - specific mechanism lead to horizontal gene transfer in prokaryote .
a )
in transformation , the cell take up dna directly from the environment .
the dna may remain separate as a plasmid or be incorporate into the host genome .
b )
in transduction , a bacteriophage inject dna that be a hybrid of viral dna and dna from a previously infect bacterial cell .
c )
in conjugation , dna be transfer between cell through a cytoplasmic bridge after a conjugation pilus draw the two cell close enough to form the bridge .

what be three way sexual reproduction introduce genetic variation into offspring ?

what be a benefit of asexual reproduction ?

what be the three mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in prokaryote ?
transformation frederick griffith be the first to demonstrate the process of transformation .
in one  nine  two  eight , - pron - show that live , nonpathogenic streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria could be transform into pathogenic bacteria through exposure to a heat - kill pathogenic strain .
- pron - conclude that some sort of agent , which - pron - call the “ transform principle , " have be pass from the dead pathogenic bacteria to the live , nonpathogenic bacteria .
in one  nine  four  four , oswald avery ( one  eight  seven  seven – one  nine  five  five ) , colin macleod ( one  nine  zero  nine – one  nine  seven  two ) , and maclyn mccarty ( one  nine  one  one – two  zero  zero  five ) demonstrate that the transform principle be dna ( see use microorganism to discover the secrets of life ) .
in transformation , the prokaryote take up naked dna find in - pron - environment and that be derive from other cell that have lyse on death and release - pron - content , include - pron - genome , into the environment .
many bacteria be naturally competent , mean that - pron - actively bind to environmental dna , transport - pron - across - pron - cell envelope into - pron - cytoplasm , and make - pron - single strand .
typically , double - strand foreign dna within cell be destroy by nuclease as a defense against viral infection .
however , these nuclease be usually ineffective against singlestranded dna , so this single - strand dna within the cell have the opportunity to recombine into the bacterial genome .
a molecule of dna that contain fragment of dna from different organism be call recombinant dna .
( recombinant dna will be discuss in more detail in microbes and the tool of genetic engineering . )
if the bacterium incorporate the new dna into - pron - own genome through recombination , the bacterial cell may gain new phenotypic property .
for example , if a nonpathogenic bacterium take up dna for a toxin gene from a pathogen and then incorporate - pron - into - pron - chromosome , - pron - , too , may become pathogenic .
plasmid dna may also be take up by competent bacteria and confer new property to the cell .
overall , transformation in nature be a relatively inefficient process because environmental dna level be low because of the activity of nuclease that be also chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  eight  one release during cellular lysis .
additionally , genetic recombination be inefficient at incorporate new dna sequence into the genome .
in nature , bacterial transformation be an important mechanism for the acquisition of genetic element encode virulence factor and antibiotic resistance .
gene encode resistance to antimicrobial compound have be show to be widespread in nature , even in environment not influence by human .
these gene , which allow microbe live in mixed community to compete for limited resource , can be transfer within a population by transformation , as well as by the other process of hgt .
in the laboratory , - pron - can exploit the natural process of bacterial transformation for genetic engineering to make a wide variety of medicinal product , as discuss in microbes and the tool of genetic engineering .

why do a bacterial cell make environmental dna bring into the cell into a single - strand form ?
transduction virus that infect bacteria ( bacteriophage ) may also move short piece of chromosomal dna from one bacterium to another in a process call transduction ( see figure six  .  nine ) .
recall that in generalize transduction , any piece of chromosomal dna may be transfer to a new host cell by accidental packaging of chromosomal dna into a phage head during phage assembly .
by contrast , specialized transduction result from the imprecise excision of a lysogenic prophage from the bacterial chromosome such that - pron - carry with - pron - a piece of the bacterial chromosome from either side of the phage 's integration site to a new host cell .
as a result , the host may acquire new property .
this process be call lysogenic conversion .
of medical significance , a lysogenic phage may carry with - pron - a virulence gene to - pron - new host .
once insert into the new host 's chromosome , the new host may gain pathogenicity .
several pathogenic bacteria , include corynebacterium diphtheriae ( the causative agent of diphtheria ) and clostridium botulinum ( the causative agent of botulism ) , be virulent because of the introduction of toxin - encode gene by lysogenic bacteriophage , affirm the clinical relevance of transduction in the exchange of gene involve in infectious disease .
archaea have - pron - own virus that translocate genetic material from one individual to another .

what be the agent of transduction of prokaryotic cell ?

in specialized transduction , where do the transducing piece of dna come from ?
the clinical consequences of transduction paul , a two  three  - year - old relief worker from atlanta , travel to haiti in two  zero  one  one to provide aid follow the two  zero  one  zero earthquake .
after work there for several week , - pron - suddenly begin experience abdominal distress , include severe cramping , nausea , vomiting , and watery diarrhea .
- pron - also begin to experience intense muscle cramping .
at a local clinic , the physician suspect that paul 's symptom be cause by cholera because there have be a cholera outbreak after the earthquake .
because cholera be transmit by the fecal - oral route , breach in sanitation infrastructure , such as often occur follow natural disaster , may precipitate outbreak .
the physician confirm the presumptive diagnosis use a cholera dipstick test .
- pron - then prescribe paul a single dose of doxycycline , as well as oral rehydration salt , instruct - pron - to drink case in point four  eight  two chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five significant amount of clean water .
cholera be cause by the gram - negative curve rod vibrio cholerae ( figure one  one  .  two  seven ) .
- pron - symptom largely result from the production of the cholera toxin ( ct ) , which ultimately activate a chloride transporter to pump chloride ion out of the epithelial cell into the gut luman .
water then follow the chloride ion , cause the prolific watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera .
the gene encode the cholera toxin be incorporate into the bacterial chromosome of v . cholerae through infection of the bacterium with the lysogenic filamentous ctx phage , which carry the ct gene and introduce - pron - into the chromosome on integration of the prophage .
thus , pathogenic strain of v . cholerae result from horizontal gene transfer by specialized transduction .

why be outbreak of cholera more common as a result of a natural disaster ?

why be muscle cramp a common symptom of cholera ?
why be treatment with oral rehydration salt so important for the treatment of cholera ?

in area stricken by cholera , what be some strategy that people could use to prevent disease transmission ?
figure one  one  .  two  seven
a scan electron micrograph of vibrio cholerae show - pron - characteristic curve rod shape .
conjugation
in conjugation , dna be directly transfer from one prokaryote to another by mean of a conjugation pilus , which bring the organism into contact with one another .
in e . coli , the gene encode the ability to conjugate be locate on a bacterial plasmid call the f plasmid , also know as the fertility factor , and the conjugation pilus be call the f pilus .
the f - plasmid gene encode both the protein compose the f pilus and those involve in roll circle replication of the plasmid .
cell contain the f plasmid , capable of form an f pilus , be call f+ cell or donor cell , and those lack an f plasmid be call f− cell or recipient cell .
conjugation of the f plasmid during typical conjugation in e . coli , the f pilus of an f+ cell come into contact with an f– cell and retract , bring the two cell envelope into contact ( figure one  one  .  two  eight ) .
then a cytoplasmic bridge form between the two cell at the site of the conjugation pilus .
as roll circle replication of the f plasmid occur in the f+ cell , a single - strand copy of the f plasmid be transfer through the cytoplasmic bridge to the f− cell , which then synthesize the complementary strand , make - pron - double strand .
the f− cell now become an f+ cell capable of make - pron - own conjugation pilus .
eventually , in a mixed bacterial population contain both f+ and f− cell , all cell will become f+ cell .
gene on the e . coli f plasmid also encode protein prevent conjugation between f+ cell .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
four  eight  three figure one  one  .  two  eight typical conjugation of the f plasmid from an f+ cell to an f− cell be bring about by the conjugation pilus bring the two cell into contact .
a single strand of the f plasmid be transfer to the f− cell , which be then make double strand .
conjugation of f ' and hfr cells
although typical conjugation in e . coli result in the transfer of the f - plasmid dna only , conjugation may also transfer chromosomal dna .
this be because the f plasmid occasionally integrate into the bacterial chromosome through recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome , form an hfr cell ( figure one  one  .  two  nine ) .
“
hfr " refer to the high frequency of recombination see when recipient f− cell receive genetic information from hfr cell through conjugation .
similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during specialized transduction , the integrated f plasmid may also be imprecisely excise from the chromosome , produce an f ' plasmid that carry with - pron - some chromosomal dna adjacent to the integration site .
on conjugation , this dna be introduce to the recipient cell and may be either maintain as part of the f ' plasmid or be recombine into the recipient cell 's bacterial chromosome .
hfr cell may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous f plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of - pron - to a recipient f− cell .
because the bacterial chromosome be so large , transfer of the entire chromosome take a long time ( figure one  one  .  three  zero ) .
however , contact between bacterial cell during conjugation be transient , so - pron - be unusual for the entire chromosome to be transfer .
host chromosomal dna near the integration site of the f plasmid , displace by the unidirectional process of roll circle replication , be more likely to be transfer and recombine into a recipient cell 's chromosome than host gene farther away .
thus , the relative location of bacterial gene on the hfr cell 's genome can be map base on when - pron - be transfer through conjugation .
as a result , prior to the age of widespread bacterial genome sequencing , distance on prokaryotic genome map be often measure in minute .
four  eight  four chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  two  nine
( a )
the f plasmid can occasionally integrate into the bacterial chromosome , produce an hfr cell .
( b ) imprecise excision of the f plasmid from the chromosome of an hfr cell may lead to the production of an f ' plasmid that carry chromosomal dna adjacent to the integration site .
this f ' plasmid can be transfer to an f− cell by conjugation .
figure one  one  .  three  zero
( a )
an hfr cell may attempt to transfer the entire bacterial chromosome to an f− cell , treat the chromosome like an extremely large f plasmid .
however , contact between cell during conjugation be temporary .
chromosomal gene close to the integration site ( gene one ) that be first displace during roll circle replication will be transfer more quickly than gene far away from the integration site ( gene four ) .
hence , - pron - be more likely to be recombine into the recipient f− cell 's chromosome .
( b )
the time - pron - take for a gene to be transfer , as detect by recombination into the f− cell 's chromosome , can be use to generate a map of the bacterial genome , such as this genomic map of e . coli .
note that - pron - take approximately one  zero  zero minute for the entire genome ( four  .  six mbp ) of an hfr strain of e . coli to be transfer by conjugation .
consequences and applications of conjugation plasmids be an important type of extrachromosomal dna element in bacteria and , in those cell that harbor - pron - , be consider to be part of the bacterial genome .
from a clinical perspective , plasmid often code for gene involve in virulence .
for example , gene encode protein that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular antibiotic be encode on r plasmid .
r plasmid , in addition to - pron - gene for antimicrobial resistance , contain gene that control conjugation and transfer of the plasmid .
r plasmid be able to transfer between cell of the same specie and between cell of different specie .
single r plasmid commonly contain multiple gene confer resistance to multiple antibiotic .
gene require for the production of various toxin and molecule important for colonization during infection chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  eight  five may also be find encode on plasmid .
for example , verotoxin - produce strain of e . coli ( vtec ) appear to have acquire the gene encode the shiga toxin from - pron - gram - negative relative shigella dysenteriae through the acquisition of a large plasmid encode this toxin .
vtec cause severe diarrheal disease that may result in hemolytic uremic syndrome ( hus ) , which may be lead to kidney failure and death .
in nonclinical setting , bacterial gene that encode metabolic enzyme need to degrade specialized atypical compound like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( pahs ) be also frequently encode on plasmid .
additionally , certain plasmid have the ability to move from bacterial cell to other cell type , like those of plant and animal , through mechanism distinct from conjugation .
such mechanism and - pron - use in genetic engineering be cover in modern applications of microbial genetics .
click through this animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two conjuganim ) to learn more about the process of conjugation .

what type of replication occur during conjugation ?

what occur to produce an hfr e . coli cell ?

what type of trait be encode on plasmid ?
transposition genetic element call transposon ( transposable element ) , or “ jumping gene , " be molecule of dna that include special invert repeat sequence at - pron - end and a gene encode the enzyme transposase ( figure one  one  .  three  one ) .
transposon allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a dna molecule and integrate into the dna elsewhere through a process call transposition .
transposon be originally discover in maize ( corn ) by american geneticist barbara mcclintock ( one  nine  zero  two – one  nine  nine  two ) in the one  nine  four  zero .
transposon have since be find in all type of organism , both prokaryote and eukaryote .
thus , unlike the three previous mechanism discuss , transposition be not prokaryote - specific .
most transposon be nonreplicative , mean - pron - move in a “ cut - and - paste ” fashion .
some may be replicative , however , retain - pron - location in the dna while make a copy to be insert elsewhere ( “ copy and paste " ) .
because transposon can move within a dna molecule , from one dna molecule to another , or even from one cell to another , - pron - have the ability to introduce genetic diversity .
movement within the same dna molecule can alter phenotype by inactivate or activate a gene .
transposon may carry with - pron - additional gene , move these gene from one location to another with - pron - .
for example , bacterial transposon can relocate antibiotic resistance gene , move - pron - from chromosome to plasmid .
this mechanism have be show to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance gene on a single r plasmid in shigella strain cause bacterial dysentery .
such an r plasmid can then be easily transfer among a bacterial population through the process of conjugation .
link to learning four  eight  six chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  three  one
transposon be segment of dna that have the ability to move from one location to another because - pron - code for the enzyme transposase .
in this example , a nonreplicative transposon have disrupt gene b .
the consequence of that the transcription of gene b may now have be interrupt .

what be two way a transposon can affect the phenotype of a cell - pron - move to ?
table one  one  .  five summarize the process discuss in this section .
summary of mechanisms of genetic diversity in prokaryotes term definition conjugation transfer of dna through direct contact use a conjugation pilus transduction mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria in which gene be transfer through viral infection transformation mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in which naked environmental dna be take up by a bacterial cell transposition process whereby dna independently excise from one location in a dna molecule and integrate elsewhere table one  one  .  five part three despite continued antibiotic treatment , mark 's infection continue to progress rapidly .
the infected region continue to expand , and - pron - have to be put on a ventilator to help - pron - breathe .
mark 's physician order surgical removal of the infected tissue .
follow an initial surgery , mark 's wound be monitor daily to ensure that the infection do not return , but - pron - continue to spread .
after two additional round of surgery , the infection finally seem to be contain .
a few day later , mark be remove from the ventilator and be able to breathe on - pron - own .
however , - pron - have lose a great deal of skin and clinical focus chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  eight  seven soft tissue on - pron - low leg .

why do the removal of infect tissue stem the infection ?

what be some likely complication of this method of treatment ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  one  .  seven gene regulation  operon theory learning objectives
 compare inducible operon and repressible operon 
describe why regulation of operon be important
each nucleate cell in a multicellular organism contain copy of the same dna .
similarly , all cell in two pure bacterial culture inoculate from the same start colony contain the same dna , with the exception of change that arise from spontaneous mutation .
if each cell in a multicellular organism have the same dna , then how be - pron - that cell in different part of the organism 's body exhibit different characteristic ?
similarly , how be - pron - that the same bacterial cell within two pure culture expose to different environmental condition can exhibit different phenotype ?
in both case , each genetically identical cell do not turn on , or express , the same set of gene .
only a subset of protein in a cell at a give time be express .
genomic dna contain both structural gene , which encode product that serve as cellular structure or enzyme , and regulatory gene , which encode product that regulate gene expression .
the expression of a gene be a highly regulated process .
whereas regulate gene expression in multicellular organism allow for cellular differentiation , in singlecelle organism like prokaryote , - pron - primarily ensure that a cell 's resource be not waste make protein that the cell do not need at that time .
elucidate the mechanism control gene expression be important to the understanding of human health .
malfunction in this process in human lead to the development of cancer and other disease .
understand the interaction between the gene expression of a pathogen and that of - pron - human host be important for the understanding of a particular infectious disease .
gene regulation involve a complex web of interaction within a give cell among signal from the cell 's environment , signal molecule within the cell , and the cell 's dna .
these interaction lead to the expression of some gene and the suppression of other , depend on circumstance .
prokaryote and eukaryote share some similarity in - pron - mechanism to regulate gene expression  however , gene expression in eukaryote be more complicated because of the temporal and spatial separation between the process of transcription and translation .
thus , although most regulation of gene expression occur through transcriptional control in prokaryote , regulation of gene expression in eukaryote occur at the transcriptional level and posttranscriptionally ( after the primary transcript have be make ) .
prokaryotic gene regulation
in bacteria and archaea , structural protein with related function be usually encode together within the genome in a block call an operon and be transcribe together under the control of a single promoter , result in the formation of a polycistronic transcript ( figure one  one  .  three  two ) .
in this way , regulation of the transcription of all of the structural gene encode the enzyme that catalyze the many step in a single biochemical pathway can be control simultaneously , because - pron - will either all be need at the same time , or none will be need .
for example , in e . coli , all of the structural gene that encode enzyme need to use lactose as an energy source lie next to each other in the lactose ( or lac ) operon under the control of a single promoter , the lac promoter .
french scientist françois jacob ( one  nine  two  zero – two  zero  one  three ) and jacques monod at the pasteur institute be the first to show the organization of bacterial gene into operon , four  eight  eight chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five through - pron - study on the lac operon of e . coli .
for this work , - pron - win the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in one  nine  six  five .
although eukaryotic gene be not organize into operon , prokaryotic operon be excellent model for learn about gene regulation generally .
there be some gene cluster in eukaryote that function similar to operon .
many of the principle can be apply to eukaryotic system and contribute to - pron - understanding of change in gene expression in eukaryote that can result pathological change such as cancer .
each operon include dna sequence that influence - pron - own transcription  these be locate in a region call the regulatory region .
the regulatory region include the promoter and the region surround the promoter , to which transcription factor , protein encode by regulatory gene , can bind .
transcription factor influence the binding of rna polymerase to the promoter and allow - pron - progression to transcribe structural gene .
a repressor be a transcription factor that suppress transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by bind to a dna sequence within the regulatory region call the operator , which be locate between the rna polymerase binding site of the promoter and the transcriptional start site of the first structural gene .
repressor bind physically block rna polymerase from transcribe structural gene .
conversely , an activator be a transcription factor that increase the transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by facilitate rna polymerase bind to the promoter .
an inducer , a third type of regulatory molecule , be a small molecule that either activate or repress transcription by interact with a repressor or an activator .
in prokaryote , there be example of operon whose gene product be require rather consistently and whose expression , therefore , be unregulated .
such operon be constitutively express , mean - pron - be transcribe and translate continuously to provide the cell with constant intermediate level of the protein product .
such gene encode enzyme involve in housekeep function require for cellular maintenance , include dna replication , repair , and expression , as well as enzyme involve in core metabolism .
in contrast , there be other prokaryotic operon that be express only when need and be regulate by repressor , activator , and inducer .
figure one  one  .  three  two
in prokaryote , structural gene of related function be often organize together on the genome and transcribe together under the control of a single promoter .
the operon 's regulatory region include both the promoter and the operator .
if a repressor bind to the operator , then the structural gene will not be transcribe .
alternatively , activator may bind to the regulatory region , enhance transcription .

what be the part in the dna sequence of an operon ?

what type of regulatory molecule be there ?
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  eight  nine regulation by repression prokaryotic operon be commonly control by the binding of repressor to operator region , thereby prevent the transcription of the structural gene .
such operon be classify as either repressible operon or inducible operon .
repressible operon , like the tryptophan ( trp ) operon , typically contain gene encode enzyme require for a biosynthetic pathway .
as long as the product of the pathway , like tryptophan , continue to be require by the cell , a repressible operon will continue to be express .
however , when the product of the biosynthetic pathway begin to accumulate in the cell , remove the need for the cell to continue to make more , the expression of the operon be repress .
conversely , inducible operon , like the lac operon of e . coli , often contain gene encode enzyme in a pathway involve in the metabolism of a specific substrate like lactose .
these enzyme be only require when that substrate be available , thus expression of the operon be typically induce only in the presence of the substrate .
the trp operon 
a repressible operon e . coli can synthesize tryptophan use enzyme that be encode by five structural gene locate next to each other in the trp operon ( figure one  one  .  three  three ) .
when environmental tryptophan be low , the operon be turn on .
this mean that transcription be initiate , the gene be express , and tryptophan be synthesize .
however , if tryptophan be present in the environment , the trp operon be turn off .
transcription do not occur and tryptophan be not synthesize .
when tryptophan be not present in the cell , the repressor by - pron - do not bind to the operator  therefore , the operon be active and tryptophan be synthesize .
however , when tryptophan accumulate in the cell , two tryptophan molecule bind to the trp repressor molecule , which change - pron - shape , allow - pron - to bind to the trp operator .
this bind of the active form of the trp repressor to the operator block rna polymerase from transcribe the structural gene , stop expression of the operon .
thus , the actual product of the biosynthetic pathway control by the operon regulate the expression of the operon .
figure one  one  .  three  three
the five structural gene need to synthesize tryptophan in e . coli be locate next to each other in the trp operon .
when tryptophan be absent , the repressor protein do not bind to the operator , and the gene be transcribe .
when tryptophan be plentiful , tryptophan bind the repressor protein at the operator sequence .
this physically block the rna polymerase from transcribe the tryptophan biosynthesis gene .
four  nine  zero chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five watch this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two trpoperon ) to learn more about the trp operon .
the lac operon  an inducible operon
the lac operon be an example of an inducible operon that be also subject to activation in the absence of glucose ( figure one  one  .  three  four ) .
the lac operon encode three structural gene necessary to acquire and process the disaccharide lactose from the environment , break - pron - down into the simple sugar glucose and galactose .
for the lac operon to be express , lactose must be present .
this make sense for the cell because - pron - would be energetically wasteful to create the enzyme to process lactose if lactose be not available .
in the absence of lactose , the lac repressor be bind to the operator region of the lac operon , physically prevent rna polymerase from transcribe the structural gene .
however , when lactose be present , the lactose inside the cell be convert to allolactose .
allolactose serve as an inducer molecule , bind to the repressor and change - pron - shape so that - pron - be no longer able to bind to the operator dna .
removal of the repressor in the presence of lactose allow rna polymerase to move through the operator region and begin transcription of the lac structural gene .
figure one  one  .  three  four
the three structural gene that be need to degrade lactose in e . coli be locate next to each other in the lac operon .
when lactose be absent , the repressor protein bind to the operator , physically block the rna polymerase from transcribe the lac structural gene .
when lactose be available , a lactose molecule bind the repressor protein , prevent the repressor from bind to the operator sequence , and the gene be transcribe .
the lac operon  activation by catabolite activator protein bacteria typically have the ability to use a variety of substrate as carbon source .
however , because glucose be usually preferable to other substrate , bacteria have mechanism to ensure that alternative substrate be only use when glucose have be deplete .
additionally , bacteria have mechanism to ensure that the gene encode enzyme for use alternative substrate be express only when the alternative substrate be available .
in the one  nine  four  zero , jacques monod be the first to demonstrate the preference for certain substrate over other through - pron - study of e . coli 's growth when culture in the presence of two different substrate simultaneously .
such study generate diauxic growth curve , like the one show in figure one  one  .  three  five .
although the preferred substrate glucose be use first , e . coli link to learn chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  nine  one grow quickly and the enzyme for lactose metabolism be absent .
however , once glucose level be deplete , growth rate slow , induce the expression of the enzyme need for the metabolism of the second substrate , lactose .
notice how the growth rate in lactose be slow , as indicate by the low steepness of the growth curve .
the ability to switch from glucose use to another substrate like lactose be a consequence of the activity of an enzyme call enzyme iia ( eiia ) .
when glucose level drop , cell produce less atp from catabolism ( see catabolism of carbohydrates ) , and eiia become phosphorylate .
phosphorylated eiia activate adenylyl cyclase , an enzyme that convert some of the remain atp to cyclic amp ( camp ) , a cyclic derivative of amp and important signal molecule involve in glucose and energy metabolism in e . coli .
as a result , camp level begin to rise in the cell ( figure one  one  .  three  six ) .
the lac operon also play a role in this switch from use glucose to use lactose .
when glucose be scarce , the accumulate camp cause by increase adenylyl cyclase activity bind to catabolite activator protein ( cap ) , also know as camp receptor protein ( crp ) .
the complex bind to the promoter region of the lac operon ( figure one  one  .  three  seven ) .
in the regulatory region of these operon , a cap bind site be locate upstream of the rna polymerase binding site in the promoter .
bind of the cap - camp complex to this site increase the bind ability of rna polymerase to the promoter region to initiate the transcription of the structural gene .
thus , in the case of the lac operon , for transcription to occur , lactose must be present ( remove the lac repressor protein ) and glucose level must be deplete ( allow bind of an activating protein ) .
when glucose level be high , there be catabolite repression of operon encode enzyme for the metabolism of alternative substrate .
because of low camp level under these condition , there be an insufficient amount of the cap - camp complex to activate transcription of these operon .
see table one  one  .  six for a summary of the regulation of the lac operon .
figure one  one  .  three  five
when grow in the presence of two substrate , e . coli use the preferred substrate ( in this case glucose ) until - pron - be deplete .
then , enzyme need for the metabolism of the second substrate be express and growth resume , although at a slow rate .
four  nine  two chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  three  six
when atp level decrease due to depletion of glucose , some remain atp be convert to camp by adenylyl cyclase .
thus , increase camp level signal glucose depletion .
figure one  one  .  three  seven
( a )
in the presence of camp , cap bind to the promoter of operon , like the lac operon , that encode gene for enzyme for the use of alternate substrate .
( b )
for the lac operon to be express , there must be activation by camp - cap as well as removal of the lac repressor from the operator .
condition affect transcription of the lac operon glucose cap bind lactose repressor bind transcription + – –
+
no
+ –
+ –
some – + – +
no – +
+ –
yes table
one  one  .  six chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  nine  three watch an animate tutorial ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two lacoperon ) about the working of lac operon here .

what affect the binding of the trp operon repressor to the operator ?

how and when be the behavior of the lac repressor protein alter ?

in addition to be repressible , how else be the lac operon regulate ?
global responses of prokaryotes
in prokaryote , there be also several high level of gene regulation that have the ability to control the transcription of many related operon simultaneously in response to an environmental signal .
a group of operon all control simultaneously be call a regulon .
alarmones when sense impending stress , prokaryote alter the expression of a wide variety of operon to respond in coordination .
- pron - do this through the production of alarmone , which be small intracellular nucleotide derivative .
alarmone change which gene be express and stimulate the expression of specific stress - response gene .
the use of alarmone to alter gene expression in response to stress appear to be important in pathogenic bacteria .
on encountering host defense mechanism and other harsh condition during infection , many operon encode virulence gene be upregulate in response to alarmone signal .
knowledge of these response be key to be able to fully understand the infection process of many pathogen and to the development of therapy to counter this process .
alternate σ factors
since the σ subunit of bacterial rna polymerase confer specificity as to which promoter should be transcribe , alter the σ factor use be another way for bacteria to quickly and globally change what regulon be transcribe at a give time .
the σ factor recognize sequence within a bacterial promoter , so different σ factor will each recognize slightly different promoter sequence .
in this way , when the cell sense specific environmental condition , - pron - may respond by change which σ factor - pron - express , degrade the old one and produce a new one to transcribe the operon encode gene whose product will be useful under the new environmental condition .
for example , in sporulate bacteria of the genera bacillus and clostridium ( which include many pathogen ) , a group of σ factor control the expression of the many gene need for sporulation in response to sporulation - stimulate signal .

what be the name give to a collection of operon that can be regulate as a group ?

what type of stimulus would trigger the transcription of a different σ factor ?
link to learn four  nine  four chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five additional methods of regulation in bacteria  attenuation and riboswitches
although most gene expression be regulate at the level of transcription initiation in prokaryote , there be also mechanism to control both the completion of transcription as well as translation concurrently .
since - pron - discovery , these mechanism have be show to control the completion of transcription and translation of many prokaryotic operon .
because these mechanism link the regulation of transcription and translation directly , - pron - be specific to prokaryote , because these process be physically separate in eukaryote .
one such regulatory system be attenuation , whereby secondary stem - loop structure form within the five ' end of an mrna be transcribe determine if transcription to complete the synthesis of this mrna will occur and if this mrna will be use for translation .
beyond the transcriptional repression mechanism already discuss , attenuation also control expression of the trp operon in e . coli ( figure one  one  .  three  eight ) .
the trp operon regulatory region contain a leader sequence call trpl between the operator and the first structural gene , which have four stretch of rna that can base pair with each other in different combination .
when a terminator stem - loop form , transcription terminate , release rna polymerase from the mrna .
however , when an antiterminator stem - loop form , this prevent the formation of the terminator stem - loop , so rna polymerase can transcribe the structural gene .
a related mechanism of concurrent regulation of transcription and translation in prokaryote be the use of a riboswitch , a small region of noncode rna find within the five ' end of some prokaryotic mrna molecule ( figure one  one  .  three  nine .
a riboswitch may bind to a small intracellular molecule to stabilize certain secondary structure of the mrna molecule .
the binding of the small molecule determine which stem - loop structure form , thus influence the completion of mrna synthesis and protein synthesis .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  nine  five figure one  one  .  three  eight
when tryptophan be plentiful , translation of the short leader peptide encode by trpl proceed , the terminator loop between region three and four form , and transcription terminate .
when tryptophan level be deplete , translation of the short leader peptide stall at region one , allow region two and three to form an antiterminator loop , and rna polymerase can transcribe the structural gene of the trp operon .
four  nine  six chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  one  .  three  nine riboswitches find within prokaryotic mrna molecule can bind to small intracellular molecule , stabilize certain rna structure , influence either the completion of the synthesis of the mrna molecule - pron - ( leave ) or the protein make use that mrna ( right ) .
other factors affect gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes
although the focus on - pron - discussion of transcriptional control use prokaryotic operon as example , eukaryotic transcriptional control be similar in many way .
as in prokaryote , eukaryotic transcription can be control through the binding of transcription factor include repressor and activator .
interestingly , eukaryotic transcription can be influence by the binding of protein to region of dna , call enhancer , rather far away from the gene , through dna looping facilitate between the enhancer and the promoter ( figure one  one  .  four  zero ) .
overall , regulate transcription be a highly effective way to control gene expression in both prokaryote and eukaryote .
however , the control of gene expression in eukaryote in response to environmental and cellular stress can be accomplish in additional way without the binding of transcription factor to regulatory region .
chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics four  nine  seven figure one  one  .  four  zero
in eukaryote , an enhancer be a dna sequence that promote transcription .
each enhancer be make up of short dna sequence call distal control element .
activator bind to the distal control element interact with mediator protein and transcription factor .
two different gene may have the same promoter but different distal control element , enable differential gene expression .
dna - level control
in eukaryote , the dna molecule or associate histone can be chemically modify in such a way as to influence transcription  this be call epigenetic regulation .
methylation of certain cytosine nucleotide in dna in response to environmental factor have be show to influence use of such dna for transcription , with dna methylation commonly correlating to lower level of gene expression .
additionally , in response to environmental factor , histone protein for package dna can also be chemically modify in multiple way , include acetylation and deacetylation , influence the packaging state of dna and thus affect the availability of loosely wound dna for transcription .
these chemical modification can sometimes be maintain through multiple round of cell division , make at least some of these epigenetic change heritable .
this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two epigreg ) describe how epigenetic regulation control gene expression .
 what stop or allow transcription to proceed when attenuation be operate ?

what determine the state of a riboswitch ?

describe the function of an enhancer .

describe two mechanism of epigenetic regulation in eukaryote .
link to learn four  nine  eight chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five resolution
although mark survive - pron - bout with necrotize fasciitis , - pron - would now have to undergo a skin - graft surgery , follow by long - term physical therapy .
base on the amount of muscle mass - pron - lose , - pron - be unlikely that - pron - leg will return to full strength , but - pron - physical therapist be optimistic that - pron - will regain some use of - pron - leg .
laboratory testing reveal the causative agent of mark 's infection be a strain of group a streptococcus ( group a strep ) .
as require by law , mark 's case be report to the state health department and ultimately to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .
at the cdc , the strain of group a strep isolate from mark be analyze more thoroughly for methicillin resistance .
methicillin resistance be genetically encode and be become more common in group a strep through horizontal gene transfer .
in necrotize fasciitis , blood flow to the infected area be typically limit because of the action of various genetically encode bacterial toxin .
this be why there be typically little to no bleeding as a result of the incision test .
unfortunately , these bacterial toxin limit the effectiveness of intravenous antibiotic in clearing infection from the skin and underlie tissue , mean that antibiotic resistance alone do not explain the ineffectiveness of mark 's treatment .
nevertheless , intravenous antibiotic therapy be warrant to help minimize the possible outcome of sepsis , which be a common outcome of necrotize fasciitis .
through genomic analysis by the cdc of the strain isolate from mark , several of the important virulence gene be show to be encode on prophage , indicate that transduction be important in the horizontal gene transfer of these gene from one bacterial cell to another .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary one  one  .  one
the functions of genetic material  dna serve two important cellular function  - pron - be the genetic material pass from parent to offspring and - pron - serve as the information to direct and regulate the construction of the protein necessary for the cell to perform all of - pron - function .

the central dogma state that dna organize into gene specify the sequence of messenger rna ( mrna ) , which , in turn , specify the amino acid sequence of protein .

the genotype of a cell be the full collection of gene a cell contain .
not all gene be use to make protein simultaneously .
the phenotype be a cell
's observable characteristic result from the protein - pron - be produce at a give time under specific environmental condition .
one  one  .  two dna replication

the dna replication process be semiconservative , which result in two dna molecule , each have one parental strand of dna and one newly synthesize strand .

in bacteria , the initiation of replication occur at the origin of replication , where supercoiled dna be unwind by dna gyrase , make single - strand by helicase , and bind by single - strand bind protein to maintain - pron - single - strand state .
primase synthesize a short rna primer , provide a free three ' - oh group to which dna polymerase iii can add dna nucleotide .

during elongation , the lead strand of dna be synthesize continuously from a single primer .
the lag strand be synthesize discontinuously in short okazaki fragment , each require - pron - own primer .
the rna primer be remove and replace with dna nucleotide by bacterial dna polymerase i , and dna ligase seal the gap between these fragment .

termination of replication in bacteria involve the resolution of circular dna concatemer by topoisomerase iv to release the two copy of the circular chromosome .

eukaryotes typically have multiple linear chromosome , each with multiple origin of replication .
overall , clinical focus chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics four  nine  nine replication in eukaryote be similar to that in prokaryote .

the linear nature of eukaryotic chromosome necessitate telomere to protect gene near the end of the chromosome .
telomerase extend telomere , prevent - pron - degradation , in some cell type .
 roll circle replication be a type of rapid unidirectional dna synthesis of a circular dna molecule use for the replication of some plasmid .
one  one  .  three rna transcription

during transcription , the information encode in dna be use to make rna .

rna polymerase synthesize rna , use the antisense strand of the dna as template by add complementary rna nucleotide to the three ' end of the grow strand .

rna polymerase bind to dna at a sequence call a promoter during the initiation of transcription .

genes encode protein of related function be frequently transcribe under the control of a single promoter in prokaryote , result in the formation of a polycistronic mrna molecule that encode multiple polypeptide .

unlike dna polymerase , rna polymerase do not require a three ' - oh group to add nucleotide , so a primer be not need during initiation .

termination of transcription in bacteria occur when the rna polymerase encounter specific dna sequence that lead to stall of the polymerase .
this result in release of rna polymerase from the dna template strand , free the rna transcript .

eukaryotes have three different rna polymerase .
eukaryote also have monocistronic mrna , each encode only a single polypeptide .

eukaryotic primary transcript be process in several way , include the addition of a five ' cap and a three ′ - poly - a tail , as well as splice , to generate a mature mrna molecule that can be transport out of the nucleus and that be protect from degradation .
one  one  .  four protein synthesis ( translation )

in translation , polypeptide be synthesize use mrna sequence and cellular machinery , include trnas that match mrna codon to specific amino acid and ribosome compose of rna and protein that catalyze the reaction .

the genetic code be degenerate in that several mrna codon code for the same amino acid .
the genetic code be almost universal among live organism .

prokaryotic ( seven  zero s ) and cytoplasmic eukaryotic ( eight  zero s ) ribosome be each compose of a large subunit and a small subunit of differ size between the two group .
each subunit be compose of rrna and protein .
organelle ribosome in eukaryotic cell resemble prokaryotic ribosome .
 some six  zero to nine  zero specie of trna exist in bacteria .
each trna have a three - nucleotide anticodon as well as a binding site for a cognate amino acid .
all trna with a specific anticodon will carry the same amino acid .

initiation of translation occur when the small ribosomal subunit bind with initiation factor and an initiator trna at the start codon of an mrna , follow by the bind to the initiation complex of the large ribosomal subunit .

in prokaryotic cell , the start codon code for n - formyl - methionine carry by a special initiator trna .
in eukaryotic cell , the start codon code for methionine carry by a special initiator trna .
in addition , whereas ribosomal binding of the mrna in prokaryote be facilitate by the shine - dalgarno sequence within the mrna , eukaryotic ribosome bind to the five ' cap of the mrna .

during the elongation stage of translation , a charge trna bind to mrna in the a site of the ribosome  a peptide bond be catalyze between the two adjacent amino acid , break the bond between the first amino acid and - pron - trna  the ribosome move one codon along the mrna  and the first trna be move from the p site of the ribosome to the e site and leave the ribosomal complex .

termination of translation occur when the ribosome encounter a stop codon , which do not code for a trna .
release factor cause the polypeptide to be release , and the ribosomal complex dissociate .
five  zero  zero chapter one  one
 mechanisms of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
in prokaryote , transcription and translation may be couple , with translation of an mrna molecule begin as soon as transcription allow enough mrna exposure for the binding of a ribosome , prior to transcription termination .
transcription and translation be not couple in eukaryote because transcription occur in the nucleus , whereas translation occur in the cytoplasm or in association with the rough endoplasmic reticulum .

polypeptides often require one or more post - translational modification to become biologically active .
one  one  .  five mutations

a mutation be a heritable change in dna .
a mutation may lead to a change in the amino - acid sequence of a protein , possibly affect - pron - function .

a point mutation affect a single base pair .
a point mutation may cause a silent mutation if the mrna codon code for the same amino acid , a missense mutation if the mrna codon code for a different amino acid , or a nonsense mutation if the mrna codon become a stop codon .

missense mutation may retain function , depend on the chemistry of the new amino acid and - pron - location in the protein .
nonsense mutation produce truncate and frequently nonfunctional protein .

a frameshift mutation result from an insertion or deletion of a number of nucleotide that be not a multiple of three .
the change in read frame alter every amino acid after the point of the mutation and result in a nonfunctional protein .

spontaneous mutation occur through dna replication error , whereas induce mutation occur through exposure to a mutagen .

mutagenic agent be frequently carcinogenic but not always .
however , nearly all carcinogen be mutagenic .

chemical mutagen include base analog and chemical that modify exist basis .
in both case , mutation be introduce after several round of dna replication .

ionizing radiation , such as x - ray and γ - ray , lead to breakage of the phosphodiest backbone of dna and can also chemically modify basis to alter - pron - base - pair rule .

nonionize radiation like ultraviolet light may introduce pyrimidine ( thymine ) dimer , which , during dna replication and transcription , may introduce frameshift or point mutation .

cell have mechanism to repair naturally occur mutation .
dna polymerase have proofread activity .
mismatch repair be a process to repair incorrectly incorporate basis after dna replication have be complete .

pyrimidine dimer can also be repair .
in nucleotide excision repair ( dark repair ) , enzyme recognize the distortion introduce by the pyrimidine dimer and replace the damage strand with the correct basis , use the undamaged dna strand as a template .
bacteria and other organism may also use direct repair , in which the photolyase enzyme , in the presence of visible light , break apart the pyrimidine .

through comparison of growth on the complete plate and lack of growth on medium lack specific nutrient , specific loss - of - function mutant call auxotroph can be identify .

the ames test be an inexpensive method that use auxotrophic bacteria to measure mutagenicity of a chemical compound .
mutagenicity be an indicator of carcinogenic potential .
one  one  .  six
how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity 
horizontal gene transfer be an important way for asexually reproduce organism like prokaryote to acquire new trait .

there be three mechanism of horizontal gene transfer typically use by bacteria  transformation , transduction , and conjugation .

transformation allow for competent cell to take up naked dna , release from other cell on - pron - death , into - pron - cytoplasm , where - pron - may recombine with the host genome .

in generalize transduction , any piece of chromosomal dna may be transfer by accidental packaging of the degraded host chromosome into a phage head .
in specialized transduction , only chromosomal dna adjacent to the integration site of a lysogenic phage may be transfer as a result of imprecise excision of the chapter one  one  mechanisms of microbial genetics five  zero  one prophage .

conjugation be mediate by the f plasmid , which encode a conjugation pilus that bring an f plasmidcontaining f+ cell into contact with an f - cell .

the rare integration of the f plasmid into the bacterial chromosome , generate an hfr cell , allow for transfer of chromosomal dna from the donor to the recipient .
additionally , imprecise excision of the f plasmid from the chromosome may generate an f ' plasmid that may be transfer to a recipient by conjugation .

conjugation transfer of r plasmid be an important mechanism for the spread of antibiotic resistance in bacterial community .

transposon be molecule of dna with invert repeat at - pron - end that also encode the enzyme transposase , allow for - pron - movement from one location in dna to another .
although find in both prokaryote and eukaryote , transposon be clinically relevant in bacterial pathogen for the movement of virulence factor , include antibiotic resistance gene .
one  one  .  seven gene regulation 
operon theory

gene expression be a tightly regulate process .
 gene expression in prokaryote be largely regulate at the point of transcription .
gene expression in eukaryote be additionally regulate post - transcriptionally .
 prokaryotic structural gene of related function be often organize into operon , all control by transcription from a single promoter .
the regulatory region of an operon include the promoter - pron - and the region surround the promoter to which transcription factor can bind to influence transcription .

although some operon be constitutively express , most be subject to regulation through the use of transcription factor ( repressor and activator ) .
a repressor bind to an operator , a dna sequence within the regulatory region between the rna polymerase binding site in the promoter and first structural gene , thereby physically block transcription of these operon .
an activator bind within the regulatory region of an operon , help rna polymerase bind to the promoter , thereby enhance the transcription of this operon .
an inducer influence transcription through interact with a repressor or activator .

the trp operon be a classic example of a repressible operon .
when tryptophan accumulate , tryptophan bind to a repressor , which then bind to the operator , prevent further transcription .

the lac operon be a classic example an inducible operon .
when lactose be present in the cell , - pron - be convert to allolactose .
allolactose act as an inducer , bind to the repressor and prevent the repressor from bind to the operator .
this allow transcription of the structural gene .

the lac operon be also subject to activation .
when glucose level be deplete , some cellular atp be convert into camp , which bind to the catabolite activator protein ( cap ) .
the camp - cap complex activate transcription of the lac operon .
when glucose level be high , - pron - presence prevent transcription of the lac operon and other operon by catabolite repression .

small intracellular molecule call alarmone be make in response to various environmental stress , allow bacteria to control the transcription of a group of operon , call a regulon .

bacteria have the ability to change which σ factor of rna polymerase - pron - use in response to environmental condition to quickly and globally change which regulon be transcribe .

prokaryote have regulatory mechanism , include attenuation and the use of riboswitche , to simultaneously control the completion of transcription and translation from that transcript .
these mechanism work through the formation of stem loop in the five ' end of an mrna molecule currently be synthesize .

there be additional point of regulation of gene expression in prokaryote and eukaryote .
in eukaryote , epigenetic regulation by chemical modification of dna or histone , and regulation of rna processing be two method .
chapter one  two modern applications of microbial genetics figure one  two  .  one a thermal cycler ( leave ) be use during a polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) .
pcr amplify the number of copy of dna and can assist in diagnosis of infection cause by microbe that be difficult to culture , such as chlamydia trachomatis ( right ) .
c . trachomatis cause chlamydia , the most common sexually transmit disease in the united states , and trachoma , the world 's lead cause of preventable blindness .
( credit right 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chapter outline one  two  .  one microbes and the tool of genetic engineering one  two  .  two visualizing and characterizing dna , rna , and protein one  two  .  three whole genome methods and pharmaceutical applications of genetic engineering one  two  .  four gene therapy introduction watson and
crick 's identification of the structure of dna in one  nine  five  three be the seminal event in the field of genetic engineering .
since the one  nine  seven  zero , there have be a veritable explosion in scientist ' ability to manipulate dna in way that have revolutionize the field of biology , medicine , diagnostic , forensic , and industrial manufacturing .
many of the molecular tool discover in recent decade have be produce use prokaryotic microbe .
in this chapter , - pron - will explore some of those tool , especially as - pron - relate to application in medicine and health care .
as an example , the thermal cycler in figure one  two  .  one be use to perform a diagnostic technique call the polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) , which rely on dna polymerase enzyme from thermophilic bacteria .
other molecular tool , such as restriction enzyme and plasmid obtain from microorganism , allow scientist to insert gene from human or other organism into microorganism .
the microorganism be then grow on an industrial scale to synthesize product such as insulin , vaccine , and biodegradable polymer .
these be just a few of the numerous application of microbial genetic that - pron - will explore in this chapter .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  zero  nine one  two  .  one microbes and the tool of genetic engineering learning objectives
 identify tool of molecular genetic that be derive from microorganism
 describe the method use to create recombinant dna molecule

describe method use to introduce dna into prokaryotic cell  list the type of genomic library and describe - pron - use  describe the method use to introduce dna into eukaryotic cell
the science of use living system to benefit humankind be call biotechnology .
technically speak , the domestication of plant and animal through farming and breeding practice be a type of biotechnology .
however , in a contemporary sense , - pron - associate biotechnology with the direct alteration of an organism 's genetic to achieve desirable trait through the process of genetic engineering .
genetic engineering involve the use of recombinant dna technology , the process by which a dna sequence be manipulate in vitro , thus create recombinant dna molecule that have new combination of genetic material .
the recombinant dna be then introduce into a host organism .
if the dna that be introduce come from a different specie , the host organism be now consider to be transgenic .
one example of a transgenic microorganism be the bacterial strain that produce human insulin
( figure one  two  .  two ) .
the insulin gene from human be insert into a plasmid .
this recombinant dna plasmid be then insert into bacteria .
as a result , these transgenic microbe be able to produce and secrete human insulin .
many prokaryote be able to acquire foreign dna and incorporate functional gene into - pron - own genome through " mate " with other cell ( conjugation ) , viral infection ( transduction ) , and take up dna from the environment ( transformation ) .
recall that these mechanism be example of horizontal gene transfer - the transfer of genetic material between cell of the same generation .
part one kayla , a two  four  - year - old electrical engineer and run enthusiast , just move from arizona to new hampshire to take a new job .
on - pron - weekend off , - pron - love to explore - pron - new surrounding , go for long run in the pine forest .
in july - pron - spend a week hike through the mountain .
in early august , kayla develop a low fever , headache , and mild muscle ache , and - pron - feel a bit fatigued .
not think much of - pron - , - pron - take some ibuprofen to combat - pron - symptom and vow to get more rest .

what type of medical condition may be responsible for kayla 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus five  one  zero chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  two recombinant dna technology be the artificial recombination of dna from two organism .
in this example , the human insulin gene be insert into a bacterial plasmid .
this recombinant plasmid can then be use to transform bacteria , which gain the ability to produce the insulin protein .
molecular cloning herbert boyer and stanley cohen first demonstrate the complete molecular cloning process in one  nine  seven  three when - pron - successfully clone gene from the african claw frog ( xenopus laevi ) into a bacterial plasmid that be then introduce into the bacterial host escherichia coli .
molecular cloning be a set of method use to construct recombinant dna and incorporate - pron - into a host organism  - pron - make use of a number of molecular tool that be derive from microorganism .
restriction enzymes and ligases
in recombinant dna technology , dna molecule be manipulate use naturally occur enzyme derive mainly from bacteria and virus .
the creation of recombinant dna molecule be possible due to the use of naturally occur restriction endonuclease ( restriction enzyme ) , bacterial enzyme produce as a protection mechanism to cut and destroy foreign cytoplasmic dna that be most commonly a result of bacteriophage infection .
stewart linn andwerner arber discover restriction enzyme in - pron - one  nine  six  zero study of how e . coli limit bacteriophage replication on infection .
today , - pron - use restriction enzyme extensively for cut dna fragment that can then be splice into another dna molecule to form recombinant molecule .
each restriction enzyme cut dna at a characteristic recognition site , a specific , usually palindromic , dna sequence typically between four to six base pair in length .
a palindrome be a sequence of letter that read the same forward as backward .
( the word
" level " be an example of a palindrome . )
palindromic dna sequence contain the same base sequence in the five ʹ to three ʹ direction on one strand as in the five ʹ to three ʹ direction on the complementary strand .
a restriction enzyme recognize the dna palindrome and cut each backbone at identical position in the palindrome .
some restriction enzyme cut to produce molecule that have complementary overhang ( sticky end ) while other cut without generate such overhang , instead produce blunt end ( figure one  two  .  three ) .
molecule with complementary sticky end can easily anneal , or form hydrogen bond between complementary basis , at - pron - sticky end .
the anneal step allow hybridization of the single - strand overhang .
hybridization refer to the join together of two complementary single strand of dna .
blunt end can also attach together , but less efficiently than sticky end due to the lack of complementary overhang facilitate the process .
in either case , ligation by dna ligase can then rejoin the two sugar - phosphate backbone of the dna through covalent bonding , make the molecule a continuous double strand .
in one  nine  seven  two , paul berg , a stanford biochemist , be the first to produce a recombinant dna molecule use this technique , combine the sv four  zero monkey virus with e . coli bacteriophage lambda to create a hybrid .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  one  one figure one  two  .  three ( a )
in this six - nucleotide restriction enzyme site , recognize by the enzyme bamhi , notice that the sequence read the same in the five ʹ to three ʹ direction on both strand .
this be know as a palindrome .
the cutting of the dna by the restriction enzyme at the site ( indicate by the black arrow ) produce dna fragment with sticky end .
another piece of dna cut with the same restriction enzyme could attach to one of these sticky end , form a recombinant dna molecule .
( b )
this four - nucleotide recognition site also exhibit a palindromic sequence .
the cutting of the dna by the restriction enzyme haeiii at the indicate site produce dna fragment with blunt end .
any other piece of blunt dna could attach to one of the blunt end produce , form a recombinant dna molecule .
plasmid
after restriction digestion , gene of interest be commonly insert into plasmid , small piece of typically circular , double - strand dna that replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome ( see unique characteristics of prokaryotic cells ) .
in recombinant dna technology , plasmid be often use as vector , dna molecule that carry dna fragment from one organism to another .
plasmid use as vector can be genetically engineer by researcher and scientific supply company to have specialize property , as illustrate by the commonly use plasmid vector puc one  nine ( figure one  two  .  four ) .
some plasmid vector contain gene that confer antibiotic resistance  these resistance gene allow researcher to easily find plasmid - contain colony by plate - pron - on medium contain the correspond antibiotic .
the antibiotic kill all host cell that do not harbor the desire plasmid vector , but those that contain the vector be able to survive and grow .
plasmid vector use for cloning typically have a polylinker site , or multiple cloning site ( mcs ) .
a polylinker site be a short sequence contain multiple unique restriction enzyme recognition site that be use for insert dna into the plasmid after restriction digestion of both the dna and the plasmid .
have these multiple restriction enzyme recognition site within the polylinker site make the plasmid vector versatile , so - pron - can be use for many different cloning experiment involve different restriction enzyme .
this polylinker site be often find within a reporter gene , another gene sequence artificially engineer into the plasmid that encode a protein that allow for visualization of dna insertion .
the reporter gene allow a researcher to distinguish host cell that contain recombinant plasmid with clone dna fragment from host cell that only contain the non - recombinant plasmid vector .
the most common reporter gene use in plasmid vector be the bacterial lacz five  one  two chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five gene encode beta - galactosidase , an enzyme that naturally degrade lactose but can also degrade a colorless synthetic analog x - gal , thereby produce blue colony on x - gal – contain medium .
the lacz reporter gene be disabled when the recombinant dna be splice into the plasmid .
because the lacz protein be not produce when the gene be disabled , x - gal be not degrade and white colony be produce , which can then be isolate .
this blue - white screening method be describe later and show in figure one  two  .  five .
in addition to these feature , some plasmid come pre - digested and with an enzyme link to the linearize plasmid to aid in ligation after the insertion of foreign dna fragment .
figure one  two  .  four
the artificially construct plasmid vector puc one  nine be commonly use for clone foreign dna .
arrow indicate the direction in which the gene be transcribe .
note the polylinker site , contain multiple unique restriction enzyme recognition site , find within the lacz reporter gene .
also note the ampicillin ( amp ) resistance gene encode on the plasmid .
molecular cloning use transformation
the most commonly use mechanism for introduce engineer plasmid into a bacterial cell be transformation , a process in which bacteria take up free dna from - pron - surrounding .
in nature , free dna typically come from other lysed bacterial cell  in the laboratory , free dna in the form of recombinant plasmid be introduce to the cell 's surrounding .
some bacteria , such as bacillus spp . , be naturally competent , mean - pron - be able to take up foreign dna .
however , not all bacteria be naturally competent .
in most case , bacteria must be make artificially competent in the laboratory by increase the permeability of the cell membrane .
this can be achieve through chemical treatment that neutralize charge on the cell membrane or by expose the bacteria to an electric field that create microscopic pore in the cell membrane .
these method yield chemically competent or electrocompetent bacteria , respectively .
follow the transformation protocol , bacterial cell be plate onto an antibiotic - contain medium to inhibit the growth of the many host cell that be not transform by the plasmid conferring antibiotic resistance .
a technique call blue - white screening be then use for lacz - encode plasmid vector such as puc one  nine .
blue colony have a functional beta - galactosidase enzyme because the lacz gene be uninterrupted , with no foreign dna insert into the polylinker site .
these colony typically result from the digested , linearize plasmid religating to - pron - .
however , chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  one  three white colony lack a functional beta - galactosidase enzyme , indicate the insertion of foreign dna within the polylinker site of the plasmid vector , thus disrupt the lacz gene .
thus , white colony result from this bluewhite screen contain plasmid with an insert and can be further screen to characterize the foreign dna .
to be sure the correct dna be incorporate into the plasmid , the dna insert can then be sequence .
view an animation of molecular cloning ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two moleclonani ) from the dna learning center .

in blue - white screening , what do a blue colony mean and
why be - pron - blue ?
molecular cloning use conjugation or transduction
the bacterial process of conjugation ( see how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity ) can also be manipulate for molecular cloning .
f plasmid , or fertility plasmid , be transfer between bacterial cell through the process of conjugation .
recombinant dna can be transfer by conjugation when bacterial cell contain a recombinant f plasmid be mix with compatible bacterial cell lack the plasmid .
f plasmid encode a surface structure call an f pilus that facilitate contact between a cell contain an f plasmid and one without an f plasmid .
on contact , a cytoplasmic bridge form between the two cell and the f - plasmid - contain cell replicate - pron - plasmid , transfer a copy of the recombinant f plasmid to the recipient cell .
once - pron - have receive the recombinant f plasmid , the recipient cell can produce - pron - own f pilus and facilitate transfer of the recombinant f plasmid to an additional cell .
the use of conjugation to transfer recombinant f plasmid to recipient cell be another effective way to introduce recombinant dna molecule into host cell .
alternatively , bacteriophage can be use to introduce recombinant dna into host bacterial cell through a manipulation of the transduction process ( see how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity ) .
in the laboratory , dna fragment of interest can be engineer into phagemid , which be plasmid that have phage sequence that allow - pron - to be package into bacteriophage .
bacterial cell can then be infect with these bacteriophage so that the recombinant phagemid can be introduce into the bacterial cell .
depend on the type of phage , the recombinant dna may be integrate into the host bacterial genome ( lysogeny ) , or - pron - may exist as a plasmid in the host 's cytoplasm .
link to learning five  one  four chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  five
the step involve in molecular cloning use bacterial transformation be outline in this graphic flowchart .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  one  five 
what be the original function of a restriction enzyme ?

what two process be exploit to get recombinant dna into a bacterial host cell ?

distinguish the use of an antibiotic resistance gene and a reporter gene in a plasmid vector .
create a genomic library molecular cloning may also be use to generate a genomic library .
the library be a complete ( or nearly complete ) copy of an organism 's genome contain as recombinant dna plasmid engineer into unique clone of bacteria .
have such a library allow a researcher to create large quantity of each fragment by grow the bacterial host for that fragment .
these fragment can be use to determine the sequence of the dna and the function of any gene present .
one method for generate a genomic library be to ligate individual restriction enzyme - digest genomic fragment into plasmid vector cut with the same restriction enzyme ( figure one  two  .  six ) .
after transformation into a bacterial host , each transform bacterial cell take up a single recombinant plasmid and grow into a colony of cell .
all of the cell in this colony be identical clone and carry the same recombinant plasmid .
the result library be a collection of colony , each of which contain a fragment of the original organism 's genome , that be each separate and distinct and can each be use for further study .
this make - pron - possible for researcher to screen these different clone to discover the one contain a gene of interest from the original organism 's genome .
figure one  two  .  six
the generation of a genomic library facilitate the discovery of the genomic dna fragment that contain a gene of interest .
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by national institutes of health )
to construct a genomic library use large fragment of genomic dna , an e . coli bacteriophage , such as lambda , can be use as a host ( figure one  two  .  seven ) .
genomic dna can be shear or enzymatically digest and ligate into a predigested bacteriophage lambda dna vector .
then , these recombinant phage dna molecule can be package into phage particle and use to infect e . coli host cell on a plate .
during infection within each cell , each recombinant phage will make many copy of - pron - and lyse the e . coli lawn , form a plaque .
thus , each plaque from a phage library represent a unique recombinant phage contain a distinct genomic dna fragment .
plaque can then be screen further to look for gene of interest .
one advantage to produce a library use phage instead of plasmid be that a phage particle hold a much large insert of foreign dna compare with a plasmid vector , thus require a much small number of culture to fully represent the entire genome of the original organism .
five  one  six chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  seven recombinant phage dna molecule be make by ligate digested phage particle with fragment genomic dna molecule .
these recombinant phage dna molecule be package into phage particle and allow to infect a bacterial lawn .
each plaque represent a unique recombinant dna molecule that can be further screen for gene of interest .
to focus on the express gene in an organism or even a tissue , researcher construct library use the organism 's messenger rna ( mrna ) rather than - pron - genomic dna .
whereas all cell in a single organism will have the same genomic dna , different tissue express different gene , produce different complement of mrna .
for example , all human cell ' genomic dna contain the gene for insulin , but only cell in the pancrea express mrna direct the production of insulin .
because mrna can not be clone directly , in the laboratory mrna must be use as a template by the retroviral enzyme reverse transcriptase to make complementary dna ( cdna ) .
a cell 's full complement of mrna can be reverse - transcribe into cdna molecule , which can be use as a template for dna polymerase to make double - strand dna copy  these fragment can subsequently be ligate into either plasmid vector or bacteriophage to produce a cdna library .
the benefit of a cdna library be that - pron - contain dna from only the express gene in the cell .
this mean that the intron , control sequence such as promoter , and dna not destine to be translate into protein be not represent in the library .
the focus on translate sequence mean that the library can not be use to study the sequence and structure of the genome in - pron - entirety .
the construction of a cdna genomic library be show in figure one  two  .  eight .
figure one  two  .  eight complementary dna ( cdna ) be make from mrna by the retroviral enzyme reverse transcriptase , convert into double - strand copy , and insert into either plasmid vector or bacteriophage , produce a cdna library .
( credit “ micrograph
" 
modification of work by national institutes of health ) chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  one  seven

what be the host for the genomic library describe ?

what be cdna ?
introducing recombinant molecules into eukaryotic hosts
the use of bacterial host for genetic engineering lay the foundation for recombinant dna technology  however , researcher have also have great interest in genetically engineer eukaryotic cell , particularly those of plant and animal .
the introduction of recombinant dna molecule into eukaryotic host be call transfection .
genetically engineer plant , call transgenic plant , be of significant interest for agricultural and pharmaceutical purpose .
the first transgenic plant sell commercially be the flavr savr delay - ripen tomato , which come to market in one  nine  nine  four .
genetically engineer livestock have also be successfully produce , result , for example , in pig with increase nutritional value[ one ] and goat that secrete pharmaceutical product in - pron - milk . [ two ]
electroporation compare to bacterial cell , eukaryotic cell tend to be less amenable as host for recombinant dna molecule .
because eukaryote be typically neither competent to take up foreign dna nor able to maintain plasmid , transfection of eukaryotic host be far more challenging and require more intrusive technique for success .
one method use for transfecte cell in cell culture be call electroporation .
a brief electric pulse induce the formation of transient pore in the phospholipid bilayer of cell through which the gene can be introduce .
at the same time , the electric pulse generate a short - live positive charge on one side of the cell 's interior and a negative charge on the opposite side  the charge difference draw negatively charge dna molecule into the cell ( figure one  two  .  nine ) .
figure one  two  .  nine electroporation be one laboratory technique use to introduce dna into eukaryotic cell .
microinjection an alternative method of transfection be call microinjection .
because eukaryotic cell be typically large than those of prokaryote , dna fragment can sometimes be directly inject into the cytoplasm use a glass one .
liangxue lai , jing x . kang , rongfeng li , jingdong wang , william t . witt , hwan yul yong , yanhong hao et al .
“
generation of cloned transgenic pigs rich in omega -  three fatty acids .
"
nature biotechnology two  four
no . four ( two  zero  zero  six )  four  three  five – four  three  six . two .
raylene ramos moura , luciana magalhães melo , and vicente josé de figueirêdo freitas .
“ production of recombinant proteins in milk of transgenic and non - transgenic goats .
" brazilian archives of biology and technology
five  four
no . five ( two  zero  one  one )  nine  two  seven – nine  three  eight .
five  one  eight chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five micropipette , as show in figure one  two  .  one  zero .
figure one  two  .  one  zero microinjection be another technique for introduce dna into eukaryotic cell .
a microinjection needle contain recombinant dna be able to penetrate both the cell membrane and nuclear envelope .
gene guns transfecte plant cell can be even more difficult than animal cell because of - pron - thick cell wall .
one approach involve treat plant cell with enzyme to remove - pron - cell wall , produce protoplast .
then , a gene gun be use to shoot gold or tungsten particle coat with recombinant dna molecule into the plant protoplast at high speed .
recipient protoplast cell can then recover and be use to generate new transgenic plant ( figure one  two  .  one  one ) .
figure
one  two  .  one  one heavy - metal particle coat with recombinant dna be shoot into plant protoplast use a gene gun .
the result transform cell be allow to recover and can be use to generate recombinant plant .
( a )
a schematic of a gene gun .
( b )
a photograph of a gene gun .
( credit a , b  modification of work by ja o ' brien , sc lummis )
shuttle vectors
another method of transfecte plant involve shuttle vector , plasmid that can move between bacterial and eukaryotic cell .
the tumor - induce ( ti ) plasmid originate from the bacterium agrobacterium tumefacien be commonly use as shuttle vector for incorporate gene into plant ( figure one  two  .  one  two ) .
in nature , the ti plasmid of a . tumefacien cause plant to develop tumor when - pron - be transfer from bacterial cell to plant cell .
researcher have be able to manipulate these naturally occur plasmid to remove - pron - tumor - cause gene and insert desirable dna fragment .
the result recombinant
ti plasmid can be transfer into the plant genome through the natural transfer of ti plasmid from the bacterium to the plant host .
once inside the plant host cell , the gene of chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  one  nine interest recombine into the plant cell 's genome .
figure one  two  .  one  two
the ti plasmid of agrobacterium tumefacien be a useful shuttle vector for the uptake of gene of interest into plant cell .
the gene of interest be clone into the ti plasmid , which be then introduce into plant cell .
the gene of interest then recombine into the plant cell 's genome , allow for the production of transgenic plant .
viral vectors viral vector can also be use to transfect eukaryotic cell .
in fact , this method be often use in gene therapy ( see gene therapy ) to introduce healthy gene into human patient suffer from disease that result from genetic mutation .
viral gene can be delete and replace with the gene to be deliver to the patient [ three ] the virus then infect the host cell and deliver the foreign dna into the genome of the target cell .
adenovirus be often use for this purpose because - pron - can be grow to high titer and can infect both nondivide and divide host cell .
however , three .
william s . m . wold and karoly toth .
“ adenovirus vectors for gene therapy , vaccination and cancer gene therapy .
"
current gene therapy one  three no . six ( two  zero  one  three ) 
four  two  one . five  two  zero chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five use of viral vector for gene therapy can pose some risk for patient , as discuss in gene therapy .

what be the method use to introduce recombinant dna vector into animal cell ?

compare and contrast shuttle vector and viral vector .
one  two  .  two visualizing and characterizing dna , rna , and protein learning objectives

explain the use of nucleic acid probe to visualize specific dna sequence 
explain the use of gel electrophoresis to separate dna fragment 
explain the principle of restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and - pron - use  compare and contrast
southern and northern blot

explain the principle and use of microarray analysis 
describe the method use to separate and visualize protein variant 
explain the method and use of polymerase chain reaction and dna sequence the sequence of a dna molecule can help - pron - identify an organism when compare to know sequence house in a database .
the sequence can also tell - pron - something about the function of a particular part of the dna , such as whether - pron - encode a particular protein .
compare protein signature - the expression level of specific array of protein - between sample be an important method for evaluate cellular response to a multitude of environmental factor and stress .
analysis of protein signature can reveal the identity of an organism or how a cell be respond during disease .
the dna and protein of interest be microscopic and typically mix in with many other molecule include dna or protein irrelevant to - pron - interest .
many technique have be develop to isolate and characterize molecule of interest .
these method be originally develop for research purpose , but in many case - pron - have be simplify to the point that routine clinical use be possible .
for example , many pathogen , such as the bacterium helicobacter pylorus , which cause stomach ulcer , can be detect use protein - base test .
in addition , an increase number of highly specific and accurate dna amplification - base identification assay can now detect pathogen such as antibiotic - resistant enteric bacteria , herpe simplex virus , varicella - zoster virus , and many other .
molecular analysis of dna
in this subsection , - pron - will outline some of the basic method use for separate and visualize specific fragment of dna that be of interest to a scientist .
some of these method do not require knowledge of the complete sequence of the dna molecule .
before the advent of rapid dna sequencing , these method be the only one available to work with dna , but - pron - still form the basic arsenal of tool use by molecular geneticist to study the body 's response to microbial and other disease .
nucleic acid probing dna molecule be small , and the information contain in - pron - sequence be invisible .
how do a researcher isolate a particular stretch of dna , or have isolate - pron - , determine what organism - pron - be from , what - pron - sequence be , or what chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  two  one - pron - function be ?
one method to identify the presence of a certain dna sequence use artificially construct piece of dna call probe .
probes can be use to identify different bacterial specie in the environment and many dna probe be now available to detect pathogen clinically .
for example , dna probe be use to detect the vaginal pathogen candida albican , gardnerella vaginalis , and trichomonas vaginalis .
to screen a genomic library for a particular gene or sequence of interest , researcher must know something about that gene .
if researcher have a portion of the sequence of dna for the gene of interest , - pron - can design a dna probe , a single - strand dna fragment that be complementary to part of the gene of interest and different from other dna sequence in the sample .
the dna probe may be synthesize chemically by commercial laboratory , or - pron - may be create by cloning , isolating , and denature a dna fragment from a live organism .
in either case , the dna probe must be label with a molecular tag or beacon , such as a radioactive phosphorus atom ( as be use for autoradiography ) or a fluorescent dye ( as be use in fluorescent in situ hybridization , or fish ) , so that the probe and the dna - pron - bind to can be see ( figure one  two  .  one  three ) .
the dna sample be probe must also be denature to make - pron - single - strand so that the single - strand dna probe can anneal to the single - strand dna sample at location where - pron - sequence be complementary .
while these technique be valuable for diagnosis , - pron - direct use on sputum and other bodily sample may be problematic due to the complex nature of these sample .
dna often must first be isolate from bodily sample through chemical extraction method before a dna probe can be use to identify pathogen .
figure one  two  .  one  three dna probe can be use to confirm the presence of a suspect pathogen in patient sample .
this diagram illustrate how a dna probe can be use to search for a gene of interest associate with the suspect pathogen .
part two
the mild , flu - like symptom that kayla be experience could be cause by any number of infectious agent .
in addition , several non - infectious autoimmune condition , such as multiple sclerosis , systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als ) , also have symptom that be consistent with kayla 's early symptom .
however , over the course of several week , kayla 's symptom worsen .
- pron - begin to experience joint pain in - pron - knee , heart palpitation , and a strange limpness in - pron - facial muscle .
in addition , - pron - suffer from a stiff neck and painful headache .
reluctantly , - pron - decide - pron - be time to seek medical attention .

do kayla 's new symptom provide any clue as to what type of infection or other medical condition
- pron -
clinical focus five  two  two chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five may have ?

what test or tool may a health - care provider use to pinpoint the pathogen cause kayla 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
agarose gel electrophoresis
there be a number of situation in which a researcher may want to physically separate a collection of dna fragment of different size .
a researcher may also digest a dna sample with a restriction enzyme to form fragment .
the result size and fragment distribution pattern can often yield useful information about the sequence of dna basis that can be use , much like a bar - code scan , to identify the individual or specie to which the dna belong .
gel electrophoresis be a technique commonly use to separate biological molecule base on size and biochemical characteristic , such as charge and polarity .
agarose gel electrophoresis be widely use to separate dna ( or rna ) of vary size that may be generate by restriction enzyme digestion or by other mean , such as the pcr ( figure one  two  .  one  four ) .
due to - pron - negatively charge backbone , dna be strongly attract to a positive electrode .
in agarose gel electrophoresis , the gel be orient horizontally in a buffer solution .
sample be load into sample well on the side of the gel close to the negative electrode , then draw through the molecular sieve of the agarose matrix toward the positive electrode .
the agarose matrix impede the movement of large molecule through the gel , whereas small molecule pass through more readily .
thus , the distance of migration be inversely correlate to the size of the dna fragment , with small fragment travel a long distance through the gel .
size of dna fragment within a sample can be estimate by comparison to fragment of know size in a dna ladder also run on the same gel .
to separate very large dna fragment , such as chromosome or viral genome , agarose gel electrophoresis can be modify by periodically alternate the orientation of the electric field during pulse - field gel electrophoresis ( pfge ) .
in pfge , small fragment can reorient - pron - and migrate slightly faster than large fragment and this technique can thus serve to separate very large fragment that would otherwise travel together during standard agarose gel electrophoresis .
in any of these electrophoresis technique , the location of the dna or rna fragment in the gel can be detect by various method .
one common method be add ethidium bromide , a stain that insert into the nucleic acid at non - specific location and can be visualize when expose to ultraviolet light .
other stain that be safe than ethidium bromide , a potential carcinogen , be now available .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
five  two  three figure one  two  .  one  four ( a )
the process of agarose gel electrophoresis .
( b )
a researcher loading sample into a gel .
( c )
this photograph show a complete electrophoresis run on an agarose gel .
the dna ladder be locate in lane one and nine .
seven sample be locate in lane two through eight .
the gel be stain with ethidium bromide and photograph under ultraviolet light .
( credit a  modification of work by magnus manske  credit b  modification of work by u . s . department of agriculture  credit c  modification of work by james jacob ) five  two  four chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five restriction fragment length polymorphism ( rflp )
analysis restriction enzyme recognition site be short ( only a few nucleotide long ) , sequence - specific palindrome , and may be find throughout the genome .
thus , difference in dna sequence in the genome of individual will lead to difference in distribution of restriction - enzyme recognition site that can be visualize as distinct banding pattern on a gel after agarose gel electrophoresis .
restriction fragment length polymorphism ( rflp ) analysis compare dna banding pattern of different dna sample after restriction digestion ( figure one  two  .  one  five ) .
rflp analysis have many practical application in both medicine and forensic science .
for example , epidemiologist use rflp analysis to track and identify the source of specific microorganism implicate in outbreak of food poisoning or certain infectious disease .
rflp analysis can also be use on human dna to determine inheritance pattern of chromosome with variant gene , include those associate with heritable disease or to establish paternity .
forensic scientist use rflp analysis as a form of dna fingerprinting , which be useful for analyze dna obtain from crime scene , suspect , and victim .
dna sample be collect , the number of copy of the sample dna molecule be increase use pcr , and then subject to restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis to generate specific banding pattern .
by compare the band pattern of sample collect from the crime scene against those collect from suspect or victim , investigator can definitively determine whether dna evidence collect at the scene be leave behind by suspect or victim .
figure one  two  .  one  five rflp analysis can be use to differentiate dna sequence .
in this example , a normal chromosome be digest into two fragment , whereas digestion of a mutated chromosome produce only one fragment .
the small red arrow point to the two different chromosome segment show the location of the restriction enzyme recognition site .
after digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis , the band pattern reflect the change by show the loss of two short band and the gain of a long band .
( credit  modification of work by national center for biotechnology information )
southern blots and modifications several molecular technique capitalize on sequence complementarity and hybridization between nucleic acid of a sample and dna probe .
typically , probe nucleic - acid sample within a gel be unsuccessful because as the dna probe soak into a gel , the sample nucleic acid within the gel diffuse out .
thus , blot technique be commonly use to transfer nucleic acid to a thin , positively charge membrane make of nitrocellulose or nylon .
in the southern blot technique , develop by sir edwin southern in one  nine  seven  five , dna fragment within a sample be first separate by agarose gel electrophoresis and then transfer to a membrane through capillary action ( figure one  two  .  one  six ) .
the dna fragment that bind to the surface of the membrane be then expose to a specific single - strand dna probe label chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  two  five with a radioactive or fluorescent molecular beacon to aid in detection .
southern blot may be use to detect the presence of certain dna sequence in a give dna sample .
once the target dna within the membrane be visualized , researcher can cut out the portion of the membrane contain the fragment to recover the dna fragment of interest .
figure one  two  .  one  six
in the southern blot technique , dna fragment be first separate by agarose gel electrophoresis , then transfer by capillary action to a nylon membrane , which be then soak with a dna probe tag with a molecular beacon for easy visualization .
variation of the southern blot - the dot blot , slot blot , and the spot blot - do not involve electrophoresis , but instead concentrate dna from a sample into a small location on a membrane .
after hybridization with a dna probe , the signal intensity detect be measure , allow the researcher to estimate the amount of target dna present within the sample .
a colony blot be another variation of the southern blot in which colony represent different clone in a genomic library be transfer to a membrane by press the membrane onto the culture plate .
the cell on the membrane be lysed and the membrane can then be probe to determine which colony within a genomic library harbor the target gene .
because the colony on the plate be still grow , the cell of interest can be isolate from the plate .
in the northern blot , another variation of the southern blot , rna ( not dna ) be immobilize on the membrane and probe .
northern blot be typically use to detect the amount of mrna make through gene expression within a tissue or organism sample .
microarray analysis
another technique that capitalize on the hybridization between complementary nucleic acid sequence be call microarray analysis .
microarray analysis be useful for the comparison of gene - expression pattern between different cell type - for example , cell infect with a virus versus uninfected cell , or cancerous cell versus healthy cell ( figure one  two  .  one  seven ) .
typically , dna or cdna from an experimental sample be deposit on a glass slide alongside know dna sequence .
each slide can hold more than three  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero different dna fragment type .
distinct dna fragment ( encompass an organism 's entire genomic library ) or cdna fragment ( correspond to an organism 's full five  two  six chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five complement of express gene ) can be individually spot on a glass slide .
once deposit on the slide , genomic dna or mrna can be isolate from the two sample for comparison .
if mrna be isolate , - pron - be reverse - transcribe to cdna use reverse transcriptase .
then the two sample of genomic dna or cdna be label with different fluorescent dye ( typically red and green ) .
the label genomic dna sample be then combine in equal amount , add to the microarray chip , and allow to hybridize to complementary spot on the microarray .
hybridization of sample genomic dna molecule can be monitor by measure the intensity of fluorescence at particular spot on the microarray .
difference in the amount of hybridization between the sample can be readily observe .
if only one sample 's nucleic acid hybridize to a particular spot on the microarray , then that spot will appear either green or red .
however , if both sample ' nucleic acid hybridize , then the spot will appear yellow due to the combination of the red and green dye .
although microarray technology allow for a holistic comparison between two sample in a short time , - pron - require sophisticated ( and expensive ) detection equipment and analysis software .
because of the expense , this technology be typically limit to research setting .
researcher have use microarray analysis to study how gene expression be affect in organism that be infect by bacteria or virus or subject to certain chemical treatment .
figure one  two  .  one  seven ( a )
the step in microarray analysis be illustrate .
here , gene expression pattern be compare between cancerous cell and healthy cell .
( b )
microarray information can be express as a heat map .
gene be show on the left side  different sample be show across the bottom .
genes express only in cancer cell be show in vary shade of red  gene express only in normal cell be show in vary shade of green .
gene that be express in both cancerous and normal cell be show in yellow .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  two  seven
explore microchip technology ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two intwebmictec ) at this interactive website .

what do a dna probe consist of ?

why be a southern blot use after gel electrophoresis of a dna digest ?
molecular analysis of proteins
in many case - pron - may not be desirable or possible to study dna or rna directly .
protein can provide speciesspecific information for identification as well as important information about how and whether a cell or tissue be respond to the presence of a pathogenic microorganism .
various protein require different method for isolation and characterization .
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
a variation of gel electrophoresis , call polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( page ) , be commonly use for separate protein .
in page , the gel matrix be finer and compose of polyacrylamide instead of agarose .
additionally , page be typically perform use a vertical gel apparatus ( figure one  two  .  one  eight ) .
because of the vary charge associate with amino acid side chain , page can be use to separate intact protein base on - pron - net charge .
alternatively , protein can be denature and coat with a negatively charge detergent call sodium dodecyl sulfate ( sds ) , mask the native charge and allow separation base on size only .
page can be further modify to separate protein base on two characteristic , such as - pron - charge at various ph as well as - pron - size , through the use of two - dimensional page .
in any of these case , follow electrophoresis , protein be visualize through staining , commonly with either coomassie blue or a silver stain .
link to learning five  two  eight chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  one  eight
( a ) sds be a detergent that denature protein and mask - pron - native charge , make - pron - uniformly negatively charge .
( b )
the process of sds - page be illustrate in these step .
( c )
a photograph of an sds - page gel show coomassie stain band where protein of different size have migrate along the gel in response to the apply voltage .
a size standard lane be visible on the right side of the gel .
( credit b  modification of work by “ geneed” / youtube )

on what basis be protein separate in sds - page ?
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  two  nine part three
when kayla describe - pron - symptom , - pron - physician at first suspect bacterial meningitis , which be consistent with - pron - headache and stiff neck .
however , - pron - soon rule this out as a possibility because meningitis typically progress more quickly than what kayla be experience .
many of - pron - symptom still parallel those of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als ) and systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) , and the physician also consider lyme disease a possibility give how much time kayla spend in the wood .
kayla do not recall any recent tick bite ( the typical mean by which lyme disease be transmit ) and - pron - do not have the typical bull's - eye rash associate with lyme disease ( figure one  two  .  one  nine ) .
however , two  zero – three  zero % of patient with lyme disease never develop this rash , so the physician do not want to rule - pron - out .
kayla 's doctor order an mri of - pron - brain , a complete blood count to test for anemia , blood test assess liver and kidney function , and additional test to confirm or rule out sle or lyme disease .
- pron - test result be inconsistent with both sle and als , and the result of the test look for lyme disease antibody be “ equivocal , " mean inconclusive .
have rule out als and sle , kayla 's doctor decide to run additional test for lyme disease .

why would kayla 's doctor still suspect lyme disease even if the test result do not detect lyme antibody in the blood ?

what type of molecular test may be use for the detection of blood antibody to lyme disease ?
figure one  two  .  one  nine
a bull - eye rash be one of the common symptom of lyme disease , but up to three  zero % of infected individual never develop a rash .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
amplification - base dna analysis methods
various method can be use for obtain sequence of dna , which be useful for study disease - cause organism .
with the advent of rapid sequencing technology , - pron - knowledge base of the entire genome of pathogenic organism have grow phenomenally .
- pron - start with a description of the polymerase chain reaction , which be not a sequencing method but have allow researcher and clinician to obtain the large quantity of dna need for sequencing and other study .
the polymerase chain reaction eliminate the dependence - pron - once have on cell to make multiple copy of dna , achieve the same result through relatively simple reaction outside the cell .
clinical focus five  three  zero chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five polymerase chain reaction ( pcr )
most method of dna analysis , such as restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis , or dna sequencing require large amount of a specific dna fragment .
in the past , large amount of dna be produce by grow the host cell of a genomic library .
however , library take time and effort to prepare and dna sample of interest often come in minute quantity .
the polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) permit rapid amplification in the number of copy of specific dna sequence for further analysis ( figure one  two  .  two  zero ) .
one of the most powerful technique in molecular biology , pcr be develop in one  nine  eight  three by kary mullis while at cetus corporation .
pcr have specific application in research , forensic , and clinical laboratory , include   determine the sequence of nucleotide in a specific region of dna  amplify a target region of dna for clone into a plasmid vector  identify the source of a dna sample leave at a crime scene  analyze sample to determine paternity  compare sample of ancient dna with modern organism  determine the presence of difficult to culture , or unculturable , microorganism in human or environmental sample pcr be an in vitro laboratory technique that take advantage of the natural process of dna replication .
the heat - stable dna polymerase enzyme use in pcr be derive from hyperthermophilic prokaryote .
taq dna polymerase , commonly use in pcr , be derive from the thermus aquaticus bacterium isolate from a hot spring in yellowstone national park .
dna replication require the use of primer for the initiation of replication to have free three ʹ - hydroxyl group available for the addition of nucleotide by dna polymerase .
however , while primer compose of rna be normally use in cell , dna primer be use for pcr .
dna primer be preferable due to - pron - stability , and dna primer with know sequence target a specific dna region can be chemically synthesize commercially .
these dna primer be functionally similar to the dna probe use for the various hybridization technique describe earlier , bind to specific target due to complementarity between the target dna sequence and the primer .
pcr occur over multiple cycle , each contain three step  denaturation , annealing , and extension .
machine call thermal cycler be use for pcr  these machine can be program to automatically cycle through the temperature require at each step ( figure one  two  .  one ) .
first , double - stranded template dna contain the target sequence be denature at approximately nine  five ° c .
the high temperature require to physically ( rather than enzymatically ) separate the dna strand be the reason the heat - stable dna polymerase be require .
next , the temperature be lower to approximately five  zero ° c .
this allow the dna primer complementary to the end of the target sequence to anneal ( stick ) to the template strand , with one primer anneal to each strand .
finally , the temperature be raise to seven  two ° c , the optimal temperature for the activity of the heat - stable dna polymerase , allow for the addition of nucleotide to the primer use the single - stranded target as a template .
each cycle double the number of double - stranded target dna copy .
typically , pcr protocol include two  five – four  zero cycle , allow for the amplification of a single target sequence by ten of million to over a trillion .
natural dna replication be design to copy the entire genome , and initiate at one or more origin site .
primer be construct during replication , not before , and do not consist of a few specific sequence .
pcr target specific region of a dna sample use sequence - specific primer .
in recent year , a variety of isothermal pcr amplification method that circumvent the need for thermal cycling have be develop , take advantage of accessory protein that aid in the dna replication process .
as the development of these method continue and - pron - use become more widespread in research , forensic , and clinical lab , thermal cycler may become obsolete .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
five  three  one figure one  two  .  two  zero
the polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) be use to produce many copy of a specific sequence of dna .
deepen - pron - understanding of the polymerase chain reaction by view this animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two polychareami ) and work through an interactive ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two intexerpolchr ) exercise .
pcr variations several later modification to pcr further increase the utility of this technique .
reverse transcriptase pcr ( rtpcr ) be use for obtain dna copy of a specific mrna molecule .
rt - pcr begin with the use of the reverse transcriptase enzyme to convert mrna molecule into cdna .
that cdna be then use as a template for traditional pcr amplification .
rt - pcr can detect whether a specific gene have be express in a sample .
another recent application of pcr be real - time pcr , also know as quantitative pcr ( qpcr ) .
standard pcr and rt - pcr link to learning five  three  two chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five protocol be not quantitative because any one of the reagent may become limit before all of the cycle within the protocol be complete , and sample be only analyze at the end .
because - pron - be not possible to determine when in the pcr or rt - pcr protocol a give reagent have become limit , - pron - be not possible to know how many cycle be complete prior to this point , and thus - pron - be not possible to determine how many original template molecule be present in the sample at the start of pcr .
in qpcr , however , the use of fluorescence allow one to monitor the increase in a double - strand template during a pcr reaction as - pron - occur .
these kinetic datum can then be use to quantify the amount of the original target sequence .
the use of qpcr in recent year have further expand the capability of pcr , allow researcher to determine the number of dna copy , and sometimes organism , present in a sample .
in clinical setting , qrt - pcr be use to determine viral load in hiv - positive patient to evaluate the effectiveness of - pron - therapy .
dna sequence a basic sequencing technique be the chain termination method , also know as the dideoxy method or the sanger dna sequencing method , develop by frederick sanger in one  nine  seven  two .
the chain termination method involve dna replication of a single - strand template with the use of a dna primer to initiate synthesis of a complementary strand , dna polymerase , a mix of the four regular deoxynucleotide ( dntp ) monomer , and a small proportion of dideoxynucleotide ( ddntps ) , each label with a molecular beacon .
the ddntps be monomer miss a hydroxyl group ( –oh ) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attach to form a chain ( figure one  two  .  two  one ) .
every time a ddntp be randomly incorporate into the grow complementary strand , - pron - terminate the process of dna replication for that particular strand .
this result in multiple short strand of replicated dna that be each terminate at a different point during replication .
when the reaction mixture be subject to gel electrophoresis , the multiple newly replicate dna strand form a ladder of differ size .
because the ddntps be label , each band on the gel reflect the size of the dna strand when the ddntp terminate the reaction .
in sanger 's day , four reaction be set up for each dna molecule be sequence , each reaction contain only one of the four possible ddntps .
each ddntp be label with a radioactive phosphorus molecule .
the product of the four reaction be then run in separate lane side by side on long , narrow page gel , and the band of vary length be detect by autoradiography .
today , this process have be simplify with the use of ddntps , each label with a different color fluorescent dye or fluorochrome ( figure one  two  .  two  two ) , in one sequence reaction contain all four possible ddntps for each dna molecule be sequence ( figure one  two  .  two  three ) .
these fluorochrome be detect by fluorescence spectroscopy .
determine the fluorescence color of each band as - pron - pass by the detector produce the nucleotide sequence of the template strand .
figure one  two  .  two  one
a dideoxynucleotide be similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide , but be miss the three ʹ hydroxyl group ( indicate by the shade box ) .
when a dideoxynucleotide be incorporate into a dna strand , dna synthesis stop .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  three  three figure one  two  .  two  two frederick sanger 's dideoxy chain termination method be illustrate , use ddntps tag with fluorochrome .
use ddntps , a mixture of dna fragment of every possible size , vary in length by only one nucleotide , can be generate .
the dna be separate on the basis of size and each band can be detect with a fluorescence detector .
five  three  four chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  two  three
this diagram summarize the sanger sequencing method use fluorochrome - label ddntps and capillary gel electrophoresis .
since two  zero  zero  five , automate sequencing technique use by laboratory fall under the umbrella of next generation sequencing , which be a group of automate technique use for rapid dna sequencing .
these method have revolutionize the field of molecular genetic because the low - cost sequencer can generate sequence of hundred of thousand or million of short fragment ( two  five to six  zero  zero base pair ) just in one day .
although several variant of next generation sequencing technology be make by different company ( for example , four  five  four life sciences ' pyrosequencing and illumina 's solexa technology ) , - pron - all allow million of basis to be sequence quickly , make the sequencing of entire genome relatively easy , inexpensive , and commonplace .
in four  five  four sequencing ( pyrosequence ) , for example , a dna sample be fragment into four  zero  zero – six  zero  zero  - bp single - strand fragment , modify with the addition of dna adapter to both end of each fragment .
each dna fragment be then immobilize on a bead and amplify by pcr , use primer design to anneal to the adapter , create a bead contain many copy of that dna fragment .
each bead be then put into a separate well contain sequence enzyme .
to the well , each of the four nucleotide be add one after the other  when each one be incorporate , pyrophosphate be release as a byproduct of polymerization , emit a small flash of light that be record by a detector .
this provide the order of nucleotide incorporate as a new strand of dna be make and be an example of synthesis sequencing .
next chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  three  five generation sequencer use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of put all the fragment in order .
overall , these technology continue to advance rapidly , decrease the cost of sequence and increase the availability of sequence datum from a wide variety of organism quickly .
the national center for biotechnology information house a widely use genetic sequence database call genbank where researcher deposit genetic information for public use .
upon publication of sequence datum , researcher upload - pron - to genbank , give other researcher access to the information .
the collaboration allow researcher to compare newly discover or unknown sample sequence information with the vast array of sequence datum that already exist .
view an animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two  four  five  four seqanim ) about four  five  four sequence to deepen - pron - understanding of this method .
use a naat to diagnose a c . difficile infection javier , an eight  zero  - year - old patient with a history of heart disease , recently return home from the hospital after undergo an angioplasty procedure to insert a stent into a cardiac artery .
to minimize the possibility of infection , javier be administer intravenous broad - spectrum antibiotic during and shortly after - pron - procedure .
- pron - be release four day after the procedure , but a week later , - pron - begin to experience mild abdominal cramping and watery diarrhea several time a day .
- pron - lose - pron - appetite , become severely dehydrate , and develop a fever .
- pron - also notice blood in - pron - stool .
javier 's wife call the physician , who instruct - pron - to take - pron - to the emergency room immediately .
the hospital staff run several test and find that javier 's kidney creatinine level be elevate compare with the level in - pron - blood , indicate that - pron - kidney be not function well .
javier 's symptom suggest a possible infection with clostridium difficile , a bacterium that be resistant to many antibiotic .
the hospital collect and culture a stool sample to look for the production of toxin a and b by c . difficile , but the result come back negative .
however , the negative result be not enough to rule out a c . difficile infection because culturing of c . difficile and detection of - pron - characteristic toxin can be difficult , particularly in some type of sample .
to be safe , - pron - proceed with a diagnostic nucleic acid amplification test ( naat ) .
currently naats be the clinical diagnostician 's gold standard for detect the genetic material of a pathogen .
in javier 's case , qpcr be use to look for the gene encode c . difficile toxin b ( tcdb ) .
when the qpcr analysis come back positive , the attend physician conclude that javier be indeed suffer from a c . difficile infection and immediately prescribe the antibiotic vancomycin , to be administer intravenously .
the antibiotic clear the infection and javier make a full recovery .
because infection with c . difficile be become widespread in javier 's community , - pron - sample be further analyze to see whether the specific strain of c . difficile could be identify .
javier 's stool sample be subject to ribotype and repetitive sequence - base pcr ( rep - pcr ) analysis .
in ribotyping , a short sequence of dna between the one  six s rrna and two  three s rrna gene be amplify and subject to restriction digestion ( figure one  two  .  two  four ) .
this sequence vary between strain of c . difficile , so restriction enzyme will cut in different place .
in rep - pcr , dna primer design to bind to short sequence commonly find repeat within the c . difficile genome be use for pcr .
follow restriction digestion , agarose gel electrophoresis be perform in both type of analysis to examine the band pattern that result from each procedure ( figure one  two  .  two  five ) .
rep - pcr can be use to further subtype various ribotype , increase resolution for detect difference between strain .
the ribotype of the strain infect javier be find to be ribotype two  seven , a strain link to learning case in point five  three  six chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five know for - pron - increase virulence , resistance to antibiotic , and increase prevalence in the united states , canada , japan , and europe . [ four ]

how do band pattern differ between strain of c . difficile ?

why do - pron - think laboratory test be unable to detect toxin production directly ?
figure one  two  .  two  four
a gel show pcr product of various clostridium difficile strain .
javier 's sample be show at the bottom  note that - pron - match ribotype two  seven in the reference set .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) figure one  two  .  two  five strain of infectious bacteria , such as c . difficile , can be identify by molecular analysis .
pcr ribotyping be commonly use to identify particular c . difficile strain .
rep - pcr be an alternate molecular technique that be also use to identify particular c . difficile strain .
( credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) chapter one  two
 modern applications of microbial genetics
five  three  seven

how be pcr similar to the natural dna replication process in cell ?
how be - pron - different ?

compare rt - pcr and qpcr in term of - pron - respective purpose .

in chain - termination sequencing , how be the identity of each nucleotide in a sequence determine ?
one  two  .  three whole genome methods and pharmaceutical applications of genetic engineering learning objectives

explain the use of genome - wide comparative analyse 
summarize the advantage of genetically engineer pharmaceutical product
advances in molecular biology have lead to the creation of entirely new field of science .
among these be field that study aspect of whole genome , collectively refer to as whole - genome method .
in this section , - pron - will provide a brief overview of the whole - genome field of genomic , transcriptomic , and proteomic .
genomics , transcriptomics , and proteomics
the study and comparison of entire genome , include the complete set of gene and - pron - nucleotide sequence and organization , be call genomic .
this field have great potential for future medical advance through the study of the human genome as well as the genome of infectious organism .
analysis of microbial genome have contribute to the development of new antibiotic , diagnostic tool , vaccine , medical treatment , and environmental cleanup technique .
the field of transcriptomic be the science of the entire collection of mrna molecule produce by cell .
scientist compare gene expression pattern between infected and uninfected host cell , gain important information about the cellular response to infectious disease .
additionally , transcriptomic can be use to monitor the gene expression of virulence factor in microorganism , aid scientist in well understand pathogenic process from this viewpoint .
when genomic and transcriptomic be apply to entire microbial community , - pron - use the term metagenomic and metatranscriptomic , respectively .
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic allow researcher to study gene and gene expression from a collection of multiple specie , many of which may not be easily culture or culture at all in the laboratory .
a dna microarray ( discuss in the previous section ) can be use in metagenomic study .
another up - and - come clinical application of genomic and transcriptomic be pharmacogenomic , also call toxicogenomic , which involve evaluate the effectiveness and safety of drug on the basis of information from an individual 's genomic sequence .
genomic response to drug can be study use experimental animal ( such as laboratory rat or mouse ) or live cell in the laboratory before embark on study with human .
change in gene expression in the presence of a drug can sometimes be an early indicator of the potential for toxic effect .
personal genome sequence information may someday be use to prescribe medication that will be most effective and least toxic on the basis of the individual patient 's genotype .
the study of proteomic be an extension of genomic that allow scientist to study the entire complement of protein in an organism , call the proteome .
even though all cell of a multicellular organism have the same set of gene , cell in various tissue produce different set of protein .
thus , the genome be constant , but the proteome vary and be four .
patrizia spigaglia , fabrizio barbanti , anna maria dionisi , and paola mastrantonio .
“
clostridium difficile isolates resistant to fluoroquinolones in italy  emergence of pcr ribotype zero  one  eight .
"
journal of clinical microbiology four  eight
no . eight ( two  zero  one  zero )  two  eight  nine  two – two  eight  nine  six .
five  three  eight chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five dynamic within an organism .
proteomic may be use to study which protein be express under various condition within a single cell type or to compare protein expression pattern between different organism .
the most prominent disease be study with proteomic approach be cancer , but this area of study be also be apply to infectious disease .
research be currently underway to examine the feasibility of use proteomic approach to diagnose various type of hepatitis , tuberculosis , and hiv infection , which be rather difficult to diagnose use currently available techniques . [ five ]
a recent and develop proteomic analysis rely on identify protein call biomarker , whose expression be affect by the disease process .
biomarker be currently be use to detect various form of cancer as well as infection cause by pathogen such as yersinia pestis and vaccinia virus . [ six ]
other “
- omic
" science relate to genomic and proteomic include metabolomic , glycomic , and lipidomic , which focus on the complete set of small - molecule metabolite , sugar , and lipid , respectively , find within a cell .
through these various global approach , scientist continue to collect , compile , and analyze large amount of genetic information .
this emerge field of bioinformatic can be use , among many other application , for clue to treat disease and understand the working of cell .
additionally , researcher can use reverse genetic , a technique relate to classic mutational analysis , to determine the function of specific gene .
classic method of study gene function involve search for the gene responsible for a give phenotype .
reverse genetic use the opposite approach , start with a specific dna sequence and attempt to determine what phenotype - pron - produce .
alternatively , scientist can attach know gene ( call reporter gene ) that encode easily observable characteristic to gene of interest , and the location of expression of such gene of interest can be easily monitor .
this give the researcher important information about what the gene product may be do or where - pron - be locate in the organism .
common reporter gene include bacterial lacz , which encode beta - galactosidase and whose activity can be monitor by change in colony color in the presence of x - gal as previously describe , and the gene encode the jellyfish protein green fluorescent protein ( gfp ) whose activity can be visualize in colony under ultraviolet light exposure ( figure one  two  .  two  six ) .
figure one  two  .  two  six
( a )
the gene encode green fluorescence protein be a commonly use reporter gene for monitor gene expression pattern in organism .
under ultraviolet light , gfp fluoresce .
here , two mouse be express gfp , while the middle mouse be not .
( b ) gfp can be use as a reporter gene in bacteria as well .
here , a plate contain bacterial colony express gfp be show .
( c ) blue - white screening in bacteria be accomplish through the use of the lacz reporter gene , follow by plate of bacteria onto medium contain x - gal .
cleavage of x - gal by the lacz enzyme result in the formation of blue colony .
( credit a  modification of work by ingrid moen , charlotte jevne , jian wang , karl - henning kalland , martha chekenya , lar a akslen , linda sleire , per ø enger , rolf k reed , anne m øyan , linda eb stuhr  credit b  modification of work by “ two  .  five jigen . com” / flickr  credit c  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) five .
e . o . list ,
d . e . berryman , b . bower , l . sackmann - sala , e . gosney , j . ding , s . okada , and j . j . kopchick .
"
the use of proteomics to study infectious diseases .
"
infectious disorders - drug targets ( formerly current drug targets - infectious disorders ) eight
no .
one ( two  zero  zero  eight )  three  one – four  five .
six .
mohan natesan , and robert g . ulrich .
“
protein microarrays and biomarkers of infectious disease .
”
international journal of molecular sciences
one  one
no . one  two ( two  zero  one  zero )
 five  one  six  five – five  one  eight  three .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  three  nine

how be genomic different from traditional genetic ?

if - pron - want to study how two different cell in the body respond to an infection , what –omic field would - pron - apply ?

what be the biomarker uncover in proteomic use for ?
resolution because kayla 's symptom be persistent and serious enough to interfere with daily activity
, kayla 's physician decide to order some laboratory test .
the physician collect sample of kayla 's blood , cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) , and synovial fluid ( from one of - pron - swollen knee ) and request pcr analysis on all three sample .
the pcr test on the csf and synovial fluid come back positive for the presence of borrelia burgdorferi , the bacterium that cause lyme disease .
kayla 's physician immediately prescribe a full course of the antibiotic doxycycline .
fortunately , kayla recover fully within a few week and do not suffer from the long - term symptom of post - treatment lyme disease syndrome ( ptlds ) , which affect one  zero – two  zero % of lyme disease patient .
to prevent future infection , kayla 's physician advise - pron - to use insect repellant and wear protective clothing during - pron - outdoor adventure .
these measure can limit exposure to lyme - bearing tick , which be common in many region of the united states during the warm month of the year .
kayla be also advise to make a habit of examine - pron - for tick after return from outdoor activity , as prompt removal of a tick greatly reduce the chance of infection .
lyme disease be often difficult to diagnose .
b . burgdorferi be not easily culture in the laboratory , and the initial symptom can be very mild and resemble those of many other disease .
but leave untreated , the symptom can become quite severe and debilitating .
in addition to two antibody test , which be inconclusive in kayla 's case , and the pcr test , a southern blot could be use with b . burgdorferi - specific dna probe to identify dna from the pathogen .
sequence of surface protein gene of borrelia specie be also be use to identify strain within the specie that may be more readily transmit to human or cause more severe disease .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
recombinant dna technology and pharmaceutical production genetic engineering have provide a way to create new pharmaceutical product call recombinant dna pharmaceutical .
such product include antibiotic drug , vaccine , and hormone use to treat various disease .
table one  two  .  one list example of recombinant dna product and - pron - use .
for example , the naturally occur antibiotic synthesis pathway of various streptomyces spp . , long know for - pron - antibiotic production capability , can be modify to improve yield or to create new antibiotic through the introduction of gene encode additional enzyme .
more than two  zero  zero new antibiotic have be generate through the targeted inactivation of gene and the novel combination of antibiotic synthesis gene in antibiotic - produce streptomyce hosts . [ seven ] genetic engineering be also use to manufacture subunit vaccine , which be safe than other vaccine because - pron - contain only a single antigenic molecule and lack any part of the genome of the pathogen ( see vaccines ) .
for clinical focus seven .
jose - luis adrio and arnold l . demain .
“
recombinant organisms for production of industrial products .
" bioengineered bugs one
no . two ( two  zero  one  zero ) 
one  one  six – one  three  one . five  four  zero chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five example , a vaccine for hepatitis b be create by insert a gene encode a hepatitis b surface protein into a yeast  the yeast then produce this protein , which the human immune system recognize as an antigen .
the hepatitis b antigen be purify from yeast culture and administer to patient as a vaccine .
even though the vaccine do not contain the hepatitis b virus , the presence of the antigenic protein stimulate the immune system to produce antibody that will protect the patient against the virus in the event of exposure . [ eight ]
[ nine ] genetic engineering have also be important in the production of other therapeutic protein , such as insulin , interferon , and human growth hormone , to treat a variety of human medical condition .
for example , at one time , - pron - be possible to treat diabetes only by give patient pig insulin , which cause allergic reaction due to small difference between the protein express in human and pig insulin .
however , since one  nine  seven  eight , recombinant dna technology have be use to produce large - scale quantity of human insulin use e . coli in a relatively inexpensive process that yield a more consistently effective pharmaceutical product .
scientist have also genetically engineer e . coli capable of produce human growth hormone ( hgh ) , which be use to treat growth disorder in child and certain other disorder in adult .
the hgh gene be clone from a cdna library and insert into e . coli cell by clone - pron - into a bacterial vector .
eventually , genetic engineering will be use to produce dna vaccine and various gene therapy , as well as customize medicine for fight cancer and other disease .
some genetically engineer pharmaceutical products and applications recombinant dna product application atrial natriuretic peptide treatment of heart disease ( e . g . , congestive heart failure ) , kidney disease , high blood pressure dnase treatment of viscous lung secretion in cystic fibrosis erythropoietin treatment of severe anemia with kidney damage factor viii treatment of hemophilia hepatitis b vaccine prevention of hepatitis b infection human growth hormone treatment of growth hormone deficiency , turner 's syndrome , burn human insulin treatment of diabetes interferons treatment of multiple sclerosis , various cancer ( e . g . , melanoma ) , viral infection ( e . g . , hepatitis b and c )
tetracenomycins use as antibiotic tissue plasminogen activator treatment of pulmonary embolism in ischemic stroke , myocardial infarction table one  two  .  one 
what bacterium have be genetically engineer to produce human insulin for the treatment of diabetes ?

explain how microorganism can be engineer to produce vaccine .
eight .
u . s . department of health and human services .
“
types of vaccines .
" two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . vaccines . gov / more_info / types / #subunit .
accessed may two  seven , two  zero  one  six .
nine .
the internet drug list .
recombivax . two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . rxlist . com / recombivax - drug . htm .
accessed may two  seven , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
five  four  one rna interference technology
in structure and function of rna , - pron - describe the function of mrna , rrna , and trna .
in addition to these type of rna , cell also produce several type of small noncoding rna molecule that be involve in the regulation of gene expression .
these include antisense rna molecule , which be complementary to region of specific mrna molecule find in both prokaryote and eukaryotic cell .
non - coding rna molecule play a major role in rna interference ( rnai ) , a natural regulatory mechanism by which mrna molecule be prevent from guide the synthesis of protein .
rna interference of specific gene result from the base pairing of short , single - strand antisense rna molecule to region within complementary mrna molecule , prevent protein synthesis .
cell use rna interference to protect - pron - from viral invasion , which may introduce double - strand rna molecule as part of the viral replication process ( figure one  two  .  two  seven ) .
figure one  two  .  two  seven cell like the eukaryotic cell show in this diagram commonly make small antisense rna molecule with sequence complementary to specific mrna molecule .
when an antisense rna molecule be bind to an mrna molecule , the mrna can no longer be use to direct protein synthesis .
( credit  modification of work by robinson r )
researcher be currently develop technique to mimic the natural process of rna interference as a way to treat viral infection in eukaryotic cell .
rna interference technology involve use small interfering rna ( sirnas ) or microrna ( mirnas )
( figure one  two  .  two  eight ) .
sirnas be completely complementary to the mrna transcript of a specific gene of interest while mirna be mostly complementary .
these double - strand rna be bind to dicer , an endonuclease that cleave the rna into short molecule ( approximately two  zero nucleotide long ) .
the rnas be then bind to rna - induce silence complex ( risc ) , a ribonucleoprotein .
the sirna - risc complex bind to mrna and cleave - pron - .
for mirna , only one of the two strand bind to risc .
the mirna - risc complex then bind to mrna , inhibit translation .
if the mirna be completely complementary to the target gene , then the mrna can be cleave .
take together , these mechanism be know as gene silencing .
five  four  two chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  two  .  two  eight
this diagram illustrate the process of use sirna or mirna in a eukaryotic cell to silence gene involve in the pathogenesis of various disease .
( credit  modification of work by national center for biotechnology information ) one  two  .  four gene therapy learning objectives

summarize the mechanism , risk , and potential benefit of gene therapy 
identify ethical issue involve gene therapy and the regulatory agency that provide oversight for clinical trial  compare
somatic - cell and germ - line gene therapy
many type of genetic engineering have yield clear benefit with few apparent risk .
few would question , for example , the value of - pron - now abundant supply of human insulin produce by genetically engineer bacteria .
however , many emerging application of genetic engineering be much more controversial , often because - pron - potential benefit be pit against significant risk , real or perceive .
this be certainly the case for gene therapy , a clinical application of genetic engineering that may one day provide a cure for many disease but be still largely an experimental approach to treatment .
mechanisms and risks of gene therapy human disease that result from genetic mutation be often difficult to treat with drug or other traditional form of therapy because the sign and symptom of disease result from abnormality in a patient 's genome .
for example , a patient may have a genetic mutation that prevent the expression of a specific protein require for the normal function of a particular cell type .
this be the case in patient with severe combined immunodeficiency ( scid ) , a genetic disease that impair the function of certain white blood cell essential to the immune system .
gene therapy attempt to correct genetic abnormality by introduce a nonmutated , functional gene into the patient 's genome .
the nonmutated gene encode a functional protein that the patient would otherwise be unable to produce .
viral vector such as adenovirus be sometimes use to introduce the functional gene  part of the viral genome be chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  four  three remove and replace with the desire gene ( figure one  two  .  two  nine ) .
more advanced form of gene therapy attempt to correct the mutation at the original site in the genome , such as be the case with treatment of scid .
figure one  two  .  two  nine gene therapy use an adenovirus vector can be use to treat or cure certain genetic disease in which a patient have a defective gene .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes of health )
so far , gene therapy have prove relatively ineffective , with the possible exception of treatment for cystic fibrosis and adenosine deaminase deficiency , a type of scid .
other trial have show the clear hazard of attempt genetic manipulation in complex multicellular organism like human .
in some patient , the use of an adenovirus vector can trigger an unanticipated inflammatory response from the immune system , which may lead to organ failure .
moreover , because virus can often target multiple cell type , the virus vector may infect cell not target for the therapy , damage these other cell and possibly lead to illness such as cancer .
another potential risk be that the modified virus could revert to be infectious and cause disease in the patient .
lastly , there be a risk that the insert gene could unintentionally inactivate another important gene in the patient 's genome , disrupt normal cell cycling and possibly lead to tumor formation and cancer .
because gene therapy involve so many risk , candidate for gene therapy need to be fully inform of these risk before provide informed consent to undergo the therapy .
gene therapy go wrong
the risk of gene therapy be realize in the one  nine  nine  nine case of jesse gelsinger , an one  eight  - year - old patient who receive gene therapy as part of a clinical trial at the university of pennsylvania .
jesse receive gene therapy for a condition call ornithine transcarbamylase ( otc ) deficiency , which lead to ammonia accumulation in the blood due to deficient ammonia processing .
four day after the treatment , jesse die after a massive immune response to the adenovirus vector . [ one  zero ] until that point , researcher have not really consider an immune response to the vector to be a legitimate risk , but on investigation , - pron - appear that the researcher have some evidence suggest that this be a possible outcome .
prior to jesse 's treatment , several other human patient have suffer side effect of the treatment , and three monkey use in a trial have die as a result of inflammation and clot disorder .
despite this information , - pron - appear that neither jesse nor - pron - family be make aware of these outcome when - pron - consent to the therapy .
jesse 's death be the first patient death due to a gene therapy treatment and result in the immediate halting of the clinical trial in which - pron - be involve , the subsequent halting of all other case in point five  four  four chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five gene therapy trial at the university of pennsylvania , and the investigation of all other gene therapy trial in the united states .
as a result , the regulation and oversight of gene therapy overall be reexamine , result in new regulatory protocol that be still in place today .

explain how gene therapy work in theory .

identify some risk of gene therapy .
oversight of gene therapy
presently , there be significant oversight of gene therapy clinical trial .
at the federal level , three agency regulate gene therapy in parallel  the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the office of human research protection ( ohrp ) , and the recombinant dna advisory committee ( rac ) at the national institutes of health ( nih ) .
along with several local agency , these federal agency interact with the institutional review board to ensure that protocol be in place to protect patient safety during clinical trial .
compliance with these protocol be enforce mostly on the local level in cooperation with the federal agency .
gene therapy be currently under the most extensive federal and local review compare to other type of therapy , which be more typically only under the review of the fda .
some researcher believe that these extensive regulation actually inhibit progress in gene therapy research .
in two  zero  one  three , the institute of medicine ( now the national academy of medicine ) call upon the nih to relax - pron - review of gene therapy trial in most cases . [ one  one ]
however , ensure patient safety continue to be of utmost concern .
ethical concerns beyond the health risk of gene therapy , the ability to genetically modify human pose a number of ethical issue relate to the limit of such “ therapy .
"
while current research be focus on gene therapy for genetic disease , scientist may one day apply these method to manipulate other genetic trait not perceive as desirable .
this raise question such as   which genetic trait be worthy of be " correct " ?

should gene therapy be use for cosmetic reason or to enhance human ability ?

should genetic manipulation be use to impart desirable trait to the unborn ?

be everyone entitle to gene therapy , or could the cost of gene therapy create new form of social inequality ?

who should be responsible for regulate and police inappropriate use of gene therapy ?
the ability to alter reproductive cell use gene therapy could also generate new ethical dilemma .
to date , the various type of gene therapy have be target to somatic cell , the non - reproductive cell within the body .
because somatic cell trait be not inherit , any genetic change accomplish by somatic - cell gene therapy would not be pass on to offspring .
however , should scientist successfully introduce new gene to germ cell ( egg or sperm ) , the result trait could be pass on to offspring .
this approach , call germ - line gene therapy , could potentially be use to combat heritable disease , but - pron - could also lead to unintended consequence for future generation .
moreover , there be the question of informed consent , because those impact by germ - line gene therapy one  zero .
barbara sibbald .
“
death but one unintended consequence of gene - therapy trial .
"
canadian medical association journal one  six  four
no .
one  one ( two  zero  zero  one )

one  six  one  two – one  six  one  two .
one  one .
kerry grens .
“
report  ease gene therapy reviews .
"
the scientist , december nine , two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . the - scientist . com / ? articles . view / articleno /  three  eight  five  seven  seven  / title / report - - ease - gene - therapy - reviews / . accessed may two  seven , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  four  five be unborn and therefore unable to choose whether - pron - receive the therapy .
for these reason , the u . s . government do not currently fund research project investigate germ - line gene therapy in human .
risky gene therapies
while there be currently no gene therapy on the market in the united states , many be in the pipeline and - pron - be likely that some will eventually be approve .
with recent advance in gene therapy target p five  three , a gene whose somatic cell mutation have be implicate in over five  zero % of human cancers , [ one  two ] cancer treatment through gene therapy could become much more widespread once - pron - reach the commercial market .
bring any new therapy to market pose ethical question that pit the expect benefit against the risk .
how quickly should new therapy be bring to the market ?
how can - pron - ensure that new therapy have be sufficiently test for safety and effectiveness before - pron - be market to the public ?
the process by which new therapy be develop and approve complicate such question , as those involve in the approval process be often under significant pressure to get a new therapy approve even in the face of significant risk .
to receive fda approval for a new therapy , researcher must collect significant laboratory datum from animal trial and submit an investigational new drug ( ind ) application to the fda 's center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) .
follow a three  zero  - day wait period during which the fda review the ind , clinical trial involve human subject may begin .
if the fda perceive a problem prior to or during the clinical trial , the fda can order a “ clinical hold " until any problem be address .
during clinical trial , researcher collect and analyze datum on the therapy 's effectiveness and safety , include any side effect observe .
once the therapy meet fda standard for effectiveness and safety , the developer can submit a new drug application ( nda ) that detail how the therapy will be manufacture , package , monitor , and administer .
because new gene therapy be frequently the result of many year ( even decade ) of laboratory and clinical research , - pron - require a significant financial investment .
by the time a therapy have reach the clinical trial stage , the financial stake be high for pharmaceutical company and - pron - shareholder .
this create potential conflict of interest that can sometimes affect the objective judgment of researcher , - pron - funder , and even trial participant .
the jesse gelsinger case ( see case in point  gene therapy go wrong ) be a classic example .
face with a life - threaten disease and no reasonable treatment available , - pron - be easy to see why a patient may be eager to participate in a clinical trial no matter the risk .
- pron - be also easy to see how a researcher may view the short - term risk for a small group of study participant as a small price to pay for the potential benefit of a game - change new treatment .
gelsinger 's death lead to increase scrutiny of gene therapy , and subsequent negative outcome of gene therapy have result in the temporary halting of clinical trial pende further investigation .
for example , when child in france treat with gene therapy for scid begin to develop leukemia several year after treatment , the fda temporarily stop clinical trial of similar type of gene therapy occur in the united states . [ one  three ] case like these highlight the need for researcher and health professional not only to value human wellbeing and patient ' right over profitability , but also to maintain scientific objectivity when evaluate the risk and benefit of new therapy .
eye on ethics one  two .
zhen wang and yi sun .
“
target p five  three for novel anticancer therapy .
”
translational oncology three , no .
one ( two  zero  one  zero )  one – one  two . one  three .
erika check .
“
gene therapy  a tragic setback .
"
nature four  two  zero
no .
six  nine  one  two ( two  zero  zero  two ) 
one  one  six – one  one  eight . five  four  six chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
why be gene therapy research so tightly regulate ?

what be the main ethical concern associate with germ - line gene therapy ?
summary one  two  .  one microbes and the tool of genetic engineering  biotechology be the science of utilize living system to benefit humankind .
in recent year , the ability to directly alter an organism 's genome through genetic engineering have be make possible due to advance in recombinant dna technology , which allow researcher to create recombinant dna molecule with new combination of genetic material .

molecular cloning involve method use to construct recombinant dna and facilitate - pron - replication in host organism .
these method include the use of restriction enzyme ( to cut both foreign dna and plasmid vector ) , ligation ( to paste fragment of dna together ) , and the introduction of recombinant dna into a host organism ( often bacteria ) .

blue - white screening allow selection of bacterial transformant that contain recombinant plasmid use the phenotype of a reporter gene that be disable by insertion of the dna fragment .

genomic library can be make by clone genomic fragment from one organism into plasmid vector or into bacteriophage .
 cdna library can be generate to represent the mrna molecule express in a cell at a give point .

transfection of eukaryotic host can be achieve through various method use electroporation , gene gun , microinjection , shuttle vector , and viral vector .
one  two  .  two visualizing and characterizing dna , rna , and protein

find a gene of interest within a sample require the use of a single - strand dna probe label with a molecular beacon ( typically radioactivity or fluorescence ) that can hybridize with a complementary singlestranded nucleic acid in the sample .

agarose gel electrophoresis allow for the separation of dna molecule base on size .

restriction fragment length polymorphism ( rflp ) analysis allow for the visualization by agarose gel electrophoresis of distinct variant of a dna sequence cause by difference in restriction site .

southern blot analysis allow researcher to find a particular dna sequence within a sample whereas northern blot analysis allow researcher to detect a particular mrna sequence express in a sample .

microarray technology be a nucleic acid hybridization technique that allow for the examination of many thousand of gene at once to find difference in gene or gene expression pattern between two sample of genomic dna or cdna ,  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( page ) allow for the separation of protein by size , especially if native protein charge be mask through pretreatment with sds .

polymerase chain reaction allow for the rapid amplification of a specific dna sequence .
variation of pcr can be use to detect mrna expression ( reverse transcriptase pcr ) or to quantify a particular sequence in the original sample ( real - time pcr ) .

although the development of sanger dna sequencing be revolutionary , advance in next generation sequence allow for the rapid and inexpensive sequencing of the genome of many organism , accelerate the volume of new sequence datum .
one  two  .  three whole genome methods and pharmaceutical applications of genetic engineering

the science of genomic allow researcher to study organism on a holistic level and have many application of medical relevance .
chapter one  two  modern applications of microbial genetics five  four  seven 
transcriptomics and proteomic allow researcher to compare gene expression pattern between different cell and show great promise in well understand global response to various condition .

the various –omic technology complement each other and together provide a more complete picture of an organism 's or microbial community 's ( metagenomic ) state .

the analysis require for large datum set produce through genomic , transcriptomic , and proteomic have lead to the emergence of bioinformatic .

reporter gene encode easily observable characteristic be commonly use to track gene expression pattern of gene of unknown function .

the use of recombinant dna technology have revolutionize the pharmaceutical industry , allow for the rapid production of high - quality recombinant dna pharmaceutical use to treat a wide variety of human condition .

rna interference technology have great promise as a method of treat viral infection by silence the expression of specific gene one  two  .  four gene therapy

while gene therapy show great promise for the treatment of genetic disease , there be also significant risk involve .

there be considerable federal and local regulation of the development of gene therapy by pharmaceutical company for use in human .

before gene therapy use can increase dramatically , there be many ethical issue that need to be address by the medical and research community , politician , and society at large .
chapter one  three control of microbial growth figure one  three  .  one
most environment , include car , be not sterile .
a study[ one ] analyze one  one location within one  eight different car to determine the number of microbial colony - form unit ( cfus ) present .
the center console harbor by far the most microbe ( five  zero  six cfu ) , possibly because that be where drink be place ( and often spill ) .
frequently touch site also have high concentration .
( credit “ photo
" 
modification of work by jeff wilcox ) chapter outline one  three  .  one
control microbial growth one  three  .  two use physical methods to control microorganisms one  three  .  three use chemical to control microorganisms
one  three  .  four test the effectiveness of antiseptics and disinfectants introduction
how clean be clean ?
people wash - pron - car and vacuum the carpet , but most would not want to eat from these surface .
similarly , - pron - may eat with silverware clean in a dishwasher , but - pron - could not use the same dishwasher to clean surgical instrument .
as these example illustrate , “ clean " be a relative term .
car washing , vacuum , and dishwashe all reduce the microbial load on the item treat , thus make - pron - “ clean .
"
but whether - pron - be " clean enough ” depend on - pron - intend use .
because people do not normally eat from car or carpet , these item do not require the same level of cleanliness that silverware do .
likewise , because silverware be not use for invasive surgery , these utensil do not require the same level of cleanliness as surgical equipment , which require sterilization to prevent infection .
why not play - pron - safe and sterilize everything ?
sterilize everything - pron - come in contact with be impractical , as well as potentially dangerous .
as this chapter will demonstrate , sterilization protocol often require time - and labor - intensive treatment that may degrade the quality of the item be treat or have toxic effect on user .
therefore , the user must consider the item 's intend application when choose a cleaning method to ensure that - pron - be " clean enough .
" one .
r . e . stephenson et al .
“ elucidation of bacteria found in car interiors and strategies to reduce the presence of potential pathogens .
"
biofouling three  zero
no .
three
( two  zero  one  four  )  three  three  seven – three  four  six .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  five  three one  three  .  one control microbial growth learning objectives

compare disinfectant , antiseptic , and sterilant

describe the principle of control the presence of microorganism through sterilization and disinfection 
differentiate between microorganism of various biological safety level and explain method use for handle microbe at each level to prevent the spread of human disease , - pron - be necessary to control the growth and abundance of microbe in or on various item frequently use by human .
inanimate item , such as doorknob , toy , or towel , which may harbor microbe and aid in disease transmission , be call fomite .
two factor heavily influence the level of cleanliness require for a particular fomite and , hence , the protocol choose to achieve this level .
the first factor be the application for which the item will be use .
for example , invasive application that require insertion into the human body require a much high level of cleanliness than application that do not .
the second factor be the level of resistance to antimicrobial treatment by potential pathogen .
for example , food preserve by can often become contaminate with the bacterium clostridium botulinum , which produce the neurotoxin that cause botulism .
because c . botulinum can produce endospore that can survive harsh condition , extreme temperature and pressure must be use to eliminate the endospore .
other organism may not require such extreme measure and can be control by a procedure such as wash clothe in a laundry machine .
laboratory biological safety levels
for researcher or laboratory personnel work with pathogen , the risk associate with specific pathogen determine the level of cleanliness and control require .
the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the national institutes of health ( nih ) have establish four classification level , call " biological safety level " ( bsl ) .
various organization around the world , include the world health organization ( who ) and the european union ( eu ) , use a similar classification scheme .
accord to the cdc , the bsl be determine by the agent 's infectivity , ease of transmission , and potential disease severity , as well as the type of work be do with the agent . [ two ]
each bsl require a different level of biocontainment to prevent contamination and spread of infectious agent to laboratory personnel and , ultimately , the community .
for example , the low bsl , bsl -  one , require the few part one roberta be a four  six  - year - old real estate agent who recently undergo a cholecystectomy ( surgery to remove painful gallstone ) .
the surgery be perform laparoscopically with the aid of a duodenoscope , a specialized endoscope that allow surgeon to see inside the body with the aid of a tiny camera .
on return home from the hospital , roberta develop abdominal pain and a high fever .
- pron - also experience a burning sensation during urination and noticed blood in - pron - urine .
- pron - notify - pron - surgeon of these symptom , per - pron - postoperative instruction .

what be some possible cause of roberta 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus two .
us centers for disease control and prevention .
“
recognize the biosafety levels .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / training / quicklearn / biosafety / . accessed june seven , two  zero  one  six .
five  five  four chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five precaution because - pron - apply to situation with the low risk for microbial infection .
bsl -  one agent be those that generally do not cause infection in healthy human adult .
these include noninfectious bacteria , such as nonpathogenic strain of escherichia coli and bacillus subtili , and virus know to infect animal other than human , such as baculoviruse ( insect virus ) .
because work with bsl -  one agent pose very little risk , few precaution be necessary .
laboratory worker use standard aseptic technique and may work with these agent at an open laboratory bench or table , wear personal protective equipment ( ppe ) such as a laboratory coat , goggle , and glove , as need .
other than a sink for handwashing and door to separate the laboratory from the rest of the building , no additional modification be need .
agent classify as bsl -  two include those that pose moderate risk to laboratory worker and the community , and be typically “ indigenous , " mean that - pron - be commonly find in that geographical area .
these include bacteria such as staphylococcus aureus and salmonella spp . , and virus like hepatitis , mump , and measle virus .
bsl -  two laboratory require additional precaution beyond those of bsl -  one , include restrict access  require ppe , include a face shield in some circumstance  and the use of biological safety cabinet for procedure that may disperse agent through the air ( call " aerosolization " ) .
bsl -  two laboratory be equip with self - close door , an eyewash station , and an autoclave , which be a specialized device for sterilize material with pressurize steam before use or disposal .
bsl -  one laboratory may also have an autoclave .
bsl -  three agent have the potential to cause lethal infection by inhalation .
these may be either indigenous or “ exotic , " mean that - pron - be derive from a foreign location , and include pathogen such as mycobacterium tuberculosis , bacillus anthracis , west nile virus , and human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) .
because of the serious nature of the infection cause by bsl -  three agent , laboratory work with - pron - require restricted access .
laboratory worker be under medical surveillance , possibly receive vaccination for the microbe with which - pron - work .
in addition to the standard ppe already mention , laboratory personnel in bsl -  three laboratory must also wear a respirator and work with microbe and infectious agent in a biological safety cabinet at all time .
bsl -  three laboratory require a handsfree sink , an eyewash station near the exit , and two set of self - close and lock door at the entrance .
these laboratory be equip with directional airflow , mean that clean air be pull through the laboratory from clean area to potentially contaminate area .
this air can not be recirculate , so a constant supply of clean air be require .
bsl -  four agent be the most dangerous and often fatal .
these microbe be typically exotic , be easily transmit by inhalation , and cause infection for which there be no treatment or vaccination .
example include ebola virus and marburg virus , both of which cause hemorrhagic fever , and smallpox virus .
there be only a small number of laboratory in the united states and around the world appropriately equip to work with these agent .
in addition to bsl -  three precaution , laboratory worker in bsl -  four facility must also change - pron - clothing on enter the laboratory , shower on exit , and decontaminate all material on exit .
while work in the laboratory , - pron - must either wear a full - body protective suit with a designate air supply or conduct all work within a biological safety cabinet with a high - efficiency particulate air ( hepa ) - filtered air supply and a doubly hepa - filter exhaust .
if wear a suit , the air pressure within the suit must be high than that outside the suit , so that if a leak in the suit occur , laboratory air that may be contaminate can not be draw into the suit ( figure one  three  .  two ) .
the laboratory - pron - must be locate either in a separate building or in an isolated portion of a building and have - pron - own air supply and exhaust system , as well as - pron - own decontamination system .
the bsl be summarize in figure one  three  .  three .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  five  five figure one  three  .  two
a protective suit like this one be an additional precaution for those who work in bsl -  four laboratory .
this suit have - pron - own air supply and maintain a positive pressure relative to the outside , so that if a leak occur , air will flow out of the suit , not into - pron - from the laboratory .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
five  five  six chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  three  .  three
the cdc classify infectious agent into four biosafety level base on potential risk to laboratory personnel and the community .
each level require a progressively great level of precaution .
( credit “ pyramid " 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
to learn more ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cdcfourbsls ) about the four bsl , visit the cdc 's website .

what be some factor use to determine the bsl necessary for work with a specific pathogen ?
sterilization
the most extreme protocol for microbial control aim to achieve sterilization  the complete removal or killing of all vegetative cell , endospore , and virus from the target item or environment .
sterilization protocol be generally reserve for laboratory , medical , manufacturing , and food industry setting , where - pron - may be imperative for certain item to be completely free of potentially infectious agent .
sterilization can be accomplish through either physical link to learn chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  five  seven mean , such as exposure to high heat , pressure , or filtration through an appropriate filter , or by chemical mean .
chemical that can be use to achieve sterilization be call sterilant .
sterilant effectively kill all microbe and virus , and , with appropriate exposure time , can also kill endospore .
for many clinical purpose , aseptic technique be necessary to prevent contamination of sterile surface .
aseptic technique involve a combination of protocol that collectively maintain sterility , or asepsis , thus prevent contamination of the patient with microbe and infectious agent .
failure to practice aseptic technique during many type of clinical procedure may introduce microbe to the patient 's body and put the patient at risk for sepsis , a systemic inflammatory response to an infection that result in high fever , increase heart and respiratory rate , shock , and , possibly , death .
medical procedure that carry risk of contamination must be perform in a sterile field , a designate area that be keep free of all vegetative microbe , endospore , and virus .
sterile field be create accord to protocol require the use of sterilize material , such as packaging and draping , and strict procedure for washing and application of sterilant .
other protocol be follow to maintain the sterile field while the medical procedure be be perform .
one food sterilization protocol , commercial sterilization , use heat at a temperature low enough to preserve food quality but high enough to destroy common pathogen responsible for food poisoning , such as c . botulinum .
because c . botulinum and - pron - endospore be commonly find in soil , - pron - may easily contaminate crop during harvesting , and these endospore can later germinate within the anaerobic environment once food be can .
metal can of food contaminate with c . botulinum will bulge due to the microbe 's production of gas  contaminated jar of food typically bulge at the metal lid .
to eliminate the risk for c . botulinum contamination , commercial food - can protocol be design with a large margin of error .
- pron - assume an impossibly large population of endospore ( one  zero  one  two per can ) and aim to reduce this population to one endospore per can to ensure the safety of canned food .
for example , low - and medium - acid food be heat to one  two  one ° c for a minimum of two  .  five  two minute , which be the time - pron - would take to reduce a population of one  zero  one  two endospore per can down to one endospore at this temperature .
even so , commercial sterilization do not eliminate the presence of all microbe  rather , - pron - target those pathogen that cause spoilage and foodborne disease , while allow many nonpathogenic organism to survive .
therefore , “ sterilization " be somewhat of a misnomer in this context , and commercial sterilization may be more accurately describe as " quasi - sterilization .
"

what be the difference between sterilization and aseptic technique ?
the association of surgical technologists publish standard ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two aststanasepte ) for aseptic technique , include create and maintain a sterile field .
other methods of control sterilization protocol require procedure that be not practical , or necessary , in many setting .
various other method be use in clinical and nonclinical setting to reduce the microbial load on item .
although the term for these method be often use interchangeably , there be important distinction ( figure one  three  .  four ) .
the process of disinfection inactivate most microbe on the surface of a fomite by use antimicrobial chemical or heat .
because some microbe remain , the disinfected item be not consider sterile .
ideally , disinfectant should be fast act , stable , easy to prepare , inexpensive , and easy to use .
an example of a natural disinfectant be vinegar  - pron - link to learning five  five  eight chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five acidity kill most microbe .
chemical disinfectant , such as chlorine bleach or product contain chlorine , be use to clean nonliving surface such as laboratory bench , clinical surface , and bathroom sink .
typical disinfection do not lead to sterilization because endospore tend to survive even when all vegetative cell have be kill .
unlike disinfectant , antiseptic be antimicrobial chemical safe for use on live skin or tissue .
example of antiseptic include hydrogen peroxide and isopropyl alcohol .
the process of apply an antiseptic be call antisepsis .
in addition to the characteristic of a good disinfectant , antiseptic must also be selectively effective against microorganism and able to penetrate tissue deeply without cause tissue damage .
the type of protocol require to achieve the desire level of cleanliness depend on the particular item to be clean .
for example , those use clinically be categorize as critical , semicritical , and noncritical .
critical item must be sterile because - pron - will be use inside the body , often penetrate sterile tissue or the bloodstream  example of critical item include surgical instrument , catheter , and intravenous fluid .
gastrointestinal endoscope and various type of equipment for respiratory therapy be example of semicritical item  - pron - may contact mucous membrane or nonintact skin but do not penetrate tissue .
semicritical item do not typically need to be sterilize but do require a high level of disinfection .
item that may contact but not penetrate intact skin be noncritical item  example be bed linen , furniture , crutch , stethoscope , and blood pressure cuff .
these article need to be clean but not highly disinfected .
the act of handwash be an example of degerme , in which microbial number be significantly reduce by gently scrub living tissue , most commonly skin , with a mild chemical ( e . g . , soap ) to avoid the transmission of pathogenic microbe .
wipe the skin with an alcohol swab at an injection site be another example of degerme .
these degerming method remove most ( but not all ) microbe from the skin 's surface .
the term sanitization refer to the cleansing of fomite to remove enough microbe to achieve level deem safe for public health .
for example , commercial dishwasher use in the food service industry typically use very hot water and air for washing and drying  the high temperature kill most microbe , sanitize the dish .
surface in hospital room be commonly sanitize use a chemical disinfectant to prevent disease transmission between patient .
figure one  three  .  four summarize common protocol , definition , application , and agent use to control microbial growth .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  five  nine figure one  three  .  four

what be the difference between a disinfectant and an antiseptic ?

which be most effective at remove microbe from a product  sanitization , degerme , or sterilization ?
explain .
part two roberta 's physician suspect that a bacterial infection be responsible for - pron - sudden - onset high fever , abdominal pain , and bloody urine .
base on these symptom , the physician diagnose a urinary tract infection ( uti ) .
a wide variety of bacteria may cause uti , which typically occur when bacteria from the low gastrointestinal tract be introduce to the urinary tract .
however , roberta 's recent gallstone surgery cause the physician to suspect that - pron - have contract a nosocomial ( hospital - acquire ) infection during - pron - surgery .
the physician take a urine sample and order a urine culture to check for the presence of white blood cell , red blood cell , and bacteria .
the result of this test would help determine the cause of the infection .
the physician also prescribe a course of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin , confident that - pron - would clear roberta 's clinical focus five  six  zero chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five infection .

what be some possible way that bacteria could have be introduce to roberta 's urinary tract during - pron - surgery ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
measure microbial control physical and chemical method of microbial control that kill the target microorganism be identify by the suffix - cide ( or - cidal ) .
the prefix indicate the type of microbe or infectious agent kill by the treatment method  bactericide kill bacteria , viricide kill or inactivate virus , and fungicide kill fungi .
other method do not kill organism but , instead , stop - pron - growth , make - pron - population static  such method be identify by the suffix - stat ( or - static ) .
for example , bacteriostatic treatment inhibit the growth of bacteria , whereas fungistatic treatment inhibit the growth of fungi .
factor that determine whether a particular treatment be - cidal or - static include the type of microorganism target , the concentration of the chemical use , and the nature of the treatment apply .
although - static treatment do not actually kill infectious agent , - pron - be often less toxic to human and other animal , and may also better preserve the integrity of the item treat .
such treatment be typically sufficient to keep the microbial population of an item in check .
the reduced toxicity of some of these - static chemical also allow - pron - to be impregnate safely into plastic to prevent the growth of microbe on these surface .
such plastic be use in product such as toy for child and cut board for food preparation .
when use to treat an infection , - static treatment be typically sufficient in an otherwise healthy individual , prevent the pathogen from multiply , thus allow the individual 's immune system to clear the infection .
the degree of microbial control can be evaluate use a microbial death curve to describe the progress and effectiveness of a particular protocol .
when expose to a particular microbial control protocol , a fix percentage of the microbe within the population will die .
because the rate of killing remain constant even when the population size vary , the percentage kill be more useful information than the absolute number of microbe kill .
death curve be often plot as semilog plot just like microbial growth curve because the reduction in microorganism be typically logarithmic ( figure one  three  .  five ) .
the amount of time - pron - take for a specific protocol to produce a one orderof - magnitude decrease in the number of organism , or the death of nine  zero % of the population , be call the decimal reduction time ( drt ) or d - value .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
five  six  one figure one  three  .  five microbial death be logarithmic and easily observe use a semilog plot instead of an arithmetic one .
the decimal reduction time ( d - value ) be the time - pron - take to kill nine  zero % of the population ( a one  - log decrease in the total population ) when expose to a specific microbial control protocol , as indicate by the purple bracket .
several factor contribute to the effectiveness of a disinfect agent or microbial control protocol .
first , as demonstrate in figure one  three  .  five , the length of time of exposure be important .
long exposure time kill more microbe .
because microbial death of a population expose to a specific protocol be logarithmic , - pron - take longer to kill a high - population load than a low - population load expose to the same protocol .
a short treatment time ( measure in multiple of the d - value ) be need when start with a small number of organism .
effectiveness also depend on the susceptibility of the agent to that disinfect agent or protocol .
the concentration of disinfect agent or intensity of exposure be also important .
for example , high temperature and high concentration of disinfectant kill microbe more quickly and effectively .
condition that limit contact between the agent and the targeted cell cell - for example , the presence of bodily fluid , tissue , organic debris ( e . g . , mud or fece ) , or biofilm on surface - increase the cleaning time or intensity of the microbial control protocol require to reach the desire level of cleanliness .
all these factor must be consider when choose the appropriate protocol to control microbial growth in a give situation .

what be two possible reason for choose a bacteriostatic treatment over a bactericidal one ?

name at least two factor that can compromise the effectiveness of a disinfect agent .
one  three  .  two use physical methods to control microorganisms learning objectives  understand and compare various physical method of control microbial growth , include heating , refrigeration , freezing , high - pressure treatment , desiccation , lyophilization , irradiation , and filtration for thousand of year , human have use various physical method of microbial control for food preservation .
five  six  two chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five common control method include the application of high temperature , radiation , filtration , and desiccation ( dry ) , among other .
many of these method nonspecifically kill cell by disrupt membrane , change membrane permeability , or damage protein and nucleic acid by denaturation , degradation , or chemical modification .
various physical method use for microbial control be describe in this section .
heat heating be one of the most common - and old - form of microbial control .
- pron - be use in simple technique like cooking and canning .
heat can kill microbe by alter - pron - membrane and denature protein .
the thermal death point ( tdp ) of a microorganism be the low temperature at which all microbe be kill in a one  zero  - minute exposure .
different microorganism will respond differently to high temperature , with some ( e . g . , endospore - former such as c . botulinum ) be more heat tolerant .
a similar parameter , the thermal death time ( tdt ) , be the length of time need to kill all microorganism in a sample at a give temperature .
these parameter be often use to describe sterilization procedure that use high heat , such as autoclave .
boiling be one of the old method of moist - heat control of microbe , and - pron - be typically quite effective at kill vegetative cell and some virus .
however , boiling be less effective at kill endospore  some endospore be able to survive up to two  zero hour of boiling .
additionally , boiling may be less effective at high altitude , where the boiling point of water be low and the boiling time need to kill microbe be therefore long .
for these reason , boil be not consider a useful sterilization technique in the laboratory or clinical setting .
many different heating protocol can be use for sterilization in the laboratory or clinic , and these protocol can be break down into two main category  dry - heat sterilization and moist - heat sterilization .
aseptic technique in the laboratory typically involve some dry - heat sterilization protocol use direct application of high heat , such as sterilize inoculate loop ( figure one  three  .  six ) .
incineration at very high temperature destroy all microorganism .
dry heat can also be apply for relatively long period of time ( at least two hour ) at temperature up to one  seven  zero ° c by use a dry - heat sterilizer , such as an oven .
however , moist - heat sterilization be typically the more effective protocol because - pron - penetrate cell well than dry heat do .
figure one  three  .  six ( a )
sterilize a loop , often refer to as “ flame a loop , " be a common component of aseptic technique in the microbiology laboratory and be use to incinerate any microorganism on the loop .
( b )
alternatively , a bactericinerator may be use to reduce aerosolization of microbe and remove the presence of an open flame in the laboratory .
these be example of dry - heat sterilization by the direct application of high heat capable of incineration .
( credit a  modification of work by anh - hue tu  credit b  modification of work by brian forster ) chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
five  six  three autoclave autoclaves rely on moist - heat sterilization .
- pron - be use to raise temperature above the boiling point of water to sterilize item such as surgical equipment from vegetative cell , virus , and especially endospore , which be know to survive boiling temperature , without damage the item .
charles chamberland ( one  eight  five  one – one  nine  zero  eight ) design the modern autoclave in one  eight  seven  nine while work in the laboratory of louis pasteur .
the autoclave be still consider the most effective method of sterilization ( figure one  three  .  seven ) .
outside laboratory and clinical setting , large industrial autoclave call retort allow for moist - heat sterilization on a large scale .
in general , the air in the chamber of an autoclave be remove and replace with increase amount of steam trap within the enclosed chamber , result in increase interior pressure and temperature above the boiling point of water .
the two main type of autoclave differ in the way that air be remove from the chamber .
in gravity displacement autoclave , steam be introduce into the chamber from the top or side .
air , which be heavy than steam , sink to the bottom of the chamber , where - pron - be force out through a vent .
complete displacement of air be difficult , especially in large load , so long cycle may be require for such load .
in prevacuum sterilizer , air be remove completely use a high - speed vacuum before introduce steam into the chamber .
because air be more completely eliminate , the steam can more easily penetrate wrap item .
many autoclave be capable of both gravity and prevacuum cycle , use the former for the decontamination of waste and sterilization of medium and unwrapped glassware , and the latter for sterilization of package instrument .
figure one  three  .  seven ( a )
an autoclave be commonly use for sterilization in the laboratory and in clinical setting .
by displace the air in the chamber with increase amount of steam , pressure increase , and temperature exceed one  zero  zero ° c can be achieve , allow for complete sterilization .
( b )
a researcher program an autoclave to sterilize a sample .
( credit a  modification of work by courtney harrington  credit b  modification of work by lackemeyer mg , kok - mercado fd , wada j , bollinger l , kindrachuk j , wahl - jensen v , kuhn jh , jahrling pb )
standard operating temperature for autoclave be one  two  one ° c or , in some case , one  three  two ° c , typically at a pressure of one  five to two  zero pound per square inch ( psi ) .
the length of exposure depend on the volume and nature of material be sterilize , but - pron - be typically two  zero minute or more , with large volume require longer exposure time to ensure sufficient heat transfer to the material be sterilize .
the steam must directly contact the liquid or dry material be sterilize , so container be leave loosely closed and instrument be loosely wrap in paper or foil .
the key to autoclave be that the temperature must be high enough to kill endospore to achieve complete sterilization .
because sterilization be so important to safe medical and laboratory protocol , quality control be essential .
autoclave may be equip with recorder to document the pressure and temperature achieve during each run .
additionally , internal indicator of various type should be autoclave along with the material to be sterilize to ensure that the proper sterilization temperature have be reach ( figure one  three  .  eight ) .
one common type of indicator be the use of heat - sensitive autoclave tape , which have white stripe that turn black when the appropriate temperature be achieve five  six  four chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five during a successful autoclave run .
this type of indicator be relatively inexpensive and can be use during every run .
however , autoclave tape provide no indication of length of exposure , so - pron - can not be use as an indicator of sterility .
another type of indicator , a biological indicator spore test , use either a strip of paper or a liquid suspension of the endospore of geobacillus stearothermophilus to determine whether the endospore be kill by the process .
the endospore of the obligate thermophilic bacterium g . stearothermophilus be the gold standard use for this purpose because of - pron - extreme heat resistance .
biological spore indicator can also be use to test the effectiveness of other sterilization protocol , include ethylene oxide , dry heat , formaldehyde , gamma radiation , and hydrogen peroxide plasma sterilization use either g . stearothermophilus , bacillus atrophaeus , b . subtili , or b . pumilus spore .
in the case of validate autoclave function , the endospore be incubate after autoclave to ensure no viable endospore remain .
bacterial growth subsequent to endospore germination can be monitor by biological indicator spore test that detect acid metabolite or fluorescence produce by enzyme derive from viable g . stearothermophilus .
a third type of autoclave indicator be the diack tube , a glass ampule contain a temperature - sensitive pellet that melt at the proper sterilization temperature .
spore strip or diack tube be use periodically to ensure the autoclave be function properly .
figure one  three  .  eight
the white strip on autoclave tape ( left tube ) turn dark during a successful autoclave run ( right tube ) .
( credit  modification of work by brian forster )
pasteurization
although complete sterilization be ideal for many medical application , - pron - be not always practical for other application and may also alter the quality of the product .
boiling and autoclaving be not ideal way to control microbial growth in many food because these method may ruin the consistency and other organoleptic ( sensory ) quality of the food .
pasteurization be a form of microbial control for food that use heat but do not render the food sterile .
traditional pasteurization kill pathogen and reduce the number of spoilage - cause microbe while maintain food quality .
the process of pasteurization be first develop by louis pasteur in the one  eight  six  zero s as a method for prevent the spoilage of beer and wine .
today , pasteurization be most commonly use to kill heat - sensitive pathogen in milk and other food product ( e . g . , apple juice and honey )
( figure one  three  .  nine ) .
however , because pasteurized food product be not sterile , - pron - will eventually spoil .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  six  five
the method use for milk pasteurization balance the temperature and the length of time of treatment .
one method , high - temperature short - time ( htst ) pasteurization , expose milk to a temperature of seven  two ° c for one  five second , which lower bacterial number while preserve the quality of the milk .
an alternative be ultra - high - temperature ( uht ) pasteurization , in which the milk be expose to a temperature of one  three  eight ° c for two or more second .
uht pasteurized milk can be store for a long time in seal container without be refrigerate  however , the very high temperature alter the protein in the milk , cause slight change in the taste and smell .
still , this method of pasteurization be advantageous in region where access to refrigeration be limit .
figure one  three  .  nine two different method of pasteurization , htst and uht , be commonly use to kill pathogen associate with milk spoilage .
( credit leave  modification of work by mark hillary  credit right 
modification of work by kerry ceszyk )

in an autoclave , how be temperature above boil achieve ?

how would the onset of spoilage compare between htst - pasteurize and uht - pasteurize milk ?

why be boil not use as a sterilization method in a clinical setting ?
refrigeration and freezing just as high temperature be effective for control microbial growth , expose microbe to low temperature can also be an easy and effective method of microbial control , with the exception of psychrophile , which prefer cold temperature ( see temperature and microbial growth ) .
refrigerator use in home kitchen or in the laboratory maintain temperature between zero ° c and seven ° c .
this temperature range inhibit microbial metabolism , slow the growth of microorganism significantly and help preserve refrigerated product such as food or medical supply .
certain type of laboratory culture can be preserve by refrigeration for later use .
freeze below − two ° c may stop microbial growth and even kill susceptible organism .
accord to the us department of agriculture ( usda ) , the only safe way that frozen food can be thaw be in the refrigerator , immerse in cold water change every three  zero minute , or in the microwave , keep the food at temperature not five  six  six chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five conducive for bacterial growth . [ three ]
in addition , halt bacterial growth can restart in thawed food , so thawed food should be treat like fresh perishable .
bacterial culture and medical specimen require long - term storage or transport be often freeze at ultra - low temperature of − seven  zero ° c or low .
these ultra - low temperature can be achieve by store specimen on dry ice in an ultra - low freezer or in special liquid nitrogen tank , which maintain temperature low than − one  nine  six ° c ( figure one  three  .  one  zero ) .
figure one  three  .  one  zero culture and other medical specimen can be store for long period at ultra - low temperature .
( a ) an ultra - low freezer maintain temperature at or below − seven  zero ° c .
( b ) even low temperature can be achieve through freezing and storage in liquid nitrogen .
( credit a  modification of work by “ expert infantry” / flickr  credit b  modification of work by usda )

do place food in a refrigerator kill bacteria on the food ?
pressure exposure to high pressure kill many microbe .
in the food industry , high - pressure processing ( also call pascalization ) be use to kill bacteria , yeast , mold , parasite , and virus in food while maintain food quality and extend shelf life .
the application of high pressure between one  zero  zero and eight  zero  zero mpa ( sea level atmospheric pressure be about zero  .  one mpa ) be sufficient to kill vegetative cell by protein denaturation , but endospore may survive these pressures . [ four ][ five ] three .
us department of agriculture .
“
freezing and food safety .
” two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . fsis . usda . gov / wps / portal / fsis / topics / food - safety - education / get - answer / food - safety - fact - sheet / safe - food - handling / freeze - and - food - safety / ct_index .
accessed june eight , two  zero  one  six .
four .
c . ferstl .
“
high pressure processing  insight on technology and regulatory requirements .
”
food for thought / white paper .
series volume one  zero .
livermore , ca 
the national food lab  july two  zero  one  three .
five .
us food and drug administration .
“
kinetics of microbial inactivation for alternative food processing technologies  high pressure processing .
" two  zero  zero  zero .
http / / www . fda . gov / food / foodscienceresearch / safepracticesforfoodprocesses / ucm one  zero  one  four  five  six  . htm .
accessed july one  nine , two  one  zero  six .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  six  seven
in clinical setting , hyperbaric oxygen therapy be sometimes use to treat infection .
in this form of therapy , a patient breathe pure oxygen at a pressure high than normal atmospheric pressure , typically between one and three atmosphere ( atm ) .
this be achieve by place the patient in a hyperbaric chamber or by supply the pressurize oxygen through a breathing tube .
hyperbaric oxygen therapy help increase oxygen saturation in tissue that become hypoxic due to infection and inflammation .
this increase oxygen concentration enhance the body 's immune response by increase the activity of neutrophil and macrophage , white blood cell that fight infection .
increase oxygen level also contribute to the formation of toxic free radical that inhibit the growth of oxygen - sensitive or anaerobic bacteria like as clostridium perfringen , a common cause of gas gangrene .
in c . perfringen infection , hyperbaric oxygen therapy can also reduce secretion of a bacterial toxin that cause tissue destruction .
hyperbaric oxygen therapy also seem to enhance the effectiveness of antibiotic treatment .
unfortunately , some rare risk include oxygen toxicity and effect on delicate tissue , such as the eye , middle ear , and lung , which may be damage by the increase air pressure .
high pressure processing be not commonly use for disinfection or sterilization of fomite .
although the application of pressure and steam in an autoclave be effective for kill endospore , - pron - be the high temperature achieve , and not the pressure directly , that result in endospore death .
a streak of bad potluck one monday in spring two  zero  one  five , an ohio woman begin to experience blur , double vision  difficulty swallowing  and droop eyelid .
- pron - be rush to the emergency department of - pron - local hospital .
during the examination , - pron - begin to experience abdominal cramping , nausea , paralysis , dry mouth , weakness of facial muscle , and difficulty speak and breathing .
base on these symptom , the hospital 's incident command center be activate , and ohio public health official be notify of a possible case of botulism .
meanwhile , other patient with similar symptom begin show up at other local hospital .
because of the suspicion of botulism , antitoxin be ship overnight from the cdc to these medical facility , to be administer to the affect patient .
the first patient die of respiratory failure as a result of paralysis , and about half of the remain victim require additional hospitalization follow antitoxin administration , with at least two require ventilator for breathing .
public health official investigate each of the case and determine that all of the patient have attend the same church potluck the day before .
moreover , - pron - trace the source of the outbreak to a potato salad make with home - can potato .
more than likely , the potato be can use boiling water , a method that allow endospore of clostridium botulinum to survive .
c . botulinum produce botulinum toxin , a neurotoxin that be often deadly once ingest .
accord to the cdc , the ohio case be the large botulism outbreak in the united states in nearly four  zero years . [ six ] killing c . botulinum endospore require a minimum temperature of one  one  six ° c ( two  four  zero ° f ) , well above the boiling point of water .
this temperature can only be reach in a pressure canner , which be recommend for home canning of low - acid food such as meat , fish , poultry , and vegetable ( figure one  three  .  one  one ) .
additionally , the cdc recommend boil home - can food for about one  zero minute before consumption .
since the botulinum toxin be heat labile ( mean that - pron - be denature by heat ) , one  zero minute of boiling will render nonfunctional any botulinum toxin that the food may contain .
case in point six .
cl mccarty et al .
“
large outbreak of botulism associated with a church potluck meal - ohio , two  zero  one  five .
"
morbidity and mortality weekly report six  four , no .
two  nine
( two  zero  one  five  )  eight  zero  two – eight  zero  three . five  six  eight chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  three  .  one  one ( a )
clostridium botulinum be the causative agent of botulism .
( b )
a pressure canner be recommend for home canning because endospore of c . botulinum can survive temperature above the boiling point of water .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by national center for home food preservation )
to learn more ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cdccanathome ) about proper homecanning technique , visit the cdc 's website .
desiccation drying , also know as desiccation or dehydration , be a method that have be use for millennium to preserve food such as raisin , prune , and jerky .
- pron - work because all cell , include microbe , require water for - pron - metabolism and survival .
although dry control microbial growth , - pron - may not kill all microbe or - pron - endospore , which may start to regrow when condition be more favorable and water content be restore .
in some case , food be dry in the sun , rely on evaporation to achieve desiccation .
freeze - dry , or lyophilization , be another method of dessication in which an item be rapidly frozen ( “ snap - frozen " ) and place under vacuum so that water be lose by sublimation .
lyophilization combine both exposure to cold temperature and desiccation , make - pron - quite effective for control microbial growth .
in addition , lyophilization cause less damage to an item than conventional desiccation and well preserve the item 's original quality .
lyophilize item may be store at room temperature if package appropriately to prevent moisture acquisition .
lyophilization be use for preservation in the food industry and be also use in the laboratory for the long - term storage and transportation of microbial culture .
the water content of food and material , call the water activity , can be lower without physical drying by the link to learning chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  six  nine addition of solute such as salt or sugar .
at very high concentration of salt or sugar , the amount of available water in microbial cell be reduce dramatically because water will be draw from an area of low solute concentration ( inside the cell ) to an area of high solute concentration ( outside the cell )
( figure one  three  .  one  two ) .
many microorganism do not survive these condition of high osmotic pressure .
honey , for example , be eight  zero % sucrose , an environment in which very few microorganism be capable of grow , thereby eliminate the need for refrigeration .
salt meat and fish , like ham and cod , respectively , be critically important food before the age of refrigeration .
fruit be preserve by add sugar , make jam and jelly .
however , certain microbe , such as mold and yeast , tend to be more tolerant of desiccation and high osmotic pressure , and , thus , may still contaminate these type of food .
figure one  three  .  one  two ( a )
the addition of a solute create a hypertonic environment , draw water out of cell .
( b )
some food can be dry directly , like raisin and jerky .
other food be dry with the addition of salt , as in the case of salt fish , or sugar , as in the case of jam .
( credit a  modification of work by “ bruce blaus” / wikimedia commons  credit raisin  modification of work by christian schnettelker  credit jerky  modification of work by larry jacobsen  credit salt fish  modification of work by “
the photographer” / wikimedia commons  credit jam  modification of work by kim becker )

how do the addition of salt or sugar to food affect - pron - water activity ?
radiation radiation in various form , from high - energy radiation to sunlight , can be use to kill microbe or inhibit - pron - growth .
ionize radiation include x - ray , gamma ray , and high - energy electron beam .
ionize radiation be strong enough to pass into the cell , where - pron - alter molecular structure and damage cell component .
for example , ionize radiation introduce double - strand break in dna molecule .
this may directly cause dna mutation to occur , or mutation may be introduce when the cell attempt to repair the dna damage .
as these mutation accumulate , - pron - eventually lead to cell death .
both x - ray and gamma ray easily penetrate paper and plastic and can therefore be use to sterilize many package material .
in the laboratory , ionize radiation be commonly use to sterilize material that can not be autoclave , such as plastic petri dish and disposable plastic inoculating loop .
for clinical use , ionize radiation be use to sterilize glove , intravenous tubing , and other latex and plastic item use for patient care .
ionize radiation be also use for the sterilization of other type of delicate , heat - sensitive material use clinically , include tissue for transplantation , pharmaceutical drug , and medical equipment .
in europe , gamma irradiation for food preservation be widely use , although - pron - have be slow to catch on in the united states ( see the micro connections box on this topic ) .
package dry spice be also often gamma - irradiate .
five  seven  zero chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five because of - pron - ability to penetrate paper , plastic , thin sheet of wood and metal , and tissue , great care must be take when use x - ray and gamma irradiation .
these type of ionize irradiation can not penetrate thick layer of iron or lead , so these metal be commonly use to protect human who may be potentially expose .
another type of radiation , nonionize radiation , be commonly use for disinfection and use less energy than ionize radiation .
- pron - do not penetrate cell or packaging .
ultraviolet ( uv ) light be one example  - pron - cause thymine dimer to form between adjacent thymine within a single strand of dna ( figure one  three  .  one  three ) .
when dna polymerase encounter the thymine dimer , - pron - do not always incorporate the appropriate complementary nucleotide ( two adenine ) , and this lead to formation of mutation that can ultimately kill microorganism .
uv light can be use effectively by both consumer and laboratory personnel to control microbial growth .
uv lamp be now commonly incorporate into water purification system for use in home .
in addition , small portable uv light be commonly use by camper to purify water from natural environment before drink .
germicidal lamp be also use in surgical suite , biological safety cabinet , and transfer hood , typically emit uv light at a wavelength of two  six  zero nm .
because uv light do not penetrate surface and will not pass through plastic or glass , cell must be expose directly to the light source .
sunlight have a very broad spectrum that include uv and visible light .
in some case , sunlight can be effective against certain bacteria because of both the formation of thymine dimer by uv light and by the production of reactive oxygen product induce in low amount by exposure to visible light .
figure one  three  .  one  three ( a ) uv radiation cause the formation of thymine dimer in dna , lead to lethal mutation in the expose microbe .
( b ) germicidal lamp that emit uv light be commonly use in the laboratory to disinfect equipment .

what be two advantage of ionize radiation as a sterilization method ?

how do the effectiveness of ionize radiation compare with that of nonionize radiation ?
irradiated food  would - pron - eat that ?
of all the way to prevent food spoilage and foodborne illness , gamma irradiation may be the most micro connections chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  seven  one unappetizing .
although gamma irradiation be a prove method of eliminate potentially harmful microbe from food , the public have yet to buy in .
most of - pron - concern , however , stem from misinformation and a poor understanding of the basic principle of radiation .
the most common method of irradiation be to expose food to cobalt -  six  zero or cesium -  one  three  seven by pass - pron - through a radiation chamber on a conveyor belt .
the food do not directly contact the radioactive material and do not become radioactive - pron - .
thus , there be no risk for exposure to radioactive material through eat gammairradiated food .
additionally , irradiated food be not significantly alter in term of nutritional quality , aside from the loss of certain vitamin , which be also exacerbate by extended storage .
alteration in taste or smell may occur in irradiated food with high fat content , such as fatty meat and dairy product , but this effect can be minimize by use low dos of radiation at cold temperature .
in the united states , the cdc , environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and the food and drug administration ( fda ) have deem irradiation safe and effective for various type of meat , poultry , shellfish , fresh fruit and vegetable , egg with shell , and spice and seasoning .
gamma irradiation of food have also be approve for use in many other country , include france , the netherlands , portugal , israel , russia , china , thailand , belgium , australia , and south africa .
to help ameliorate consumer concern and assist with education effort , irradiate food be now clearly label and mark with the international irradiation symbol , call the " radura "
( figure one  three  .  one  four ) .
consumer acceptance seem to be rise , as indicate by several recent studies . [ seven ] figure one  three  .  one  four ( a ) food be expose to gamma radiation by passage on a conveyor belt through a radiation chamber .
( b ) gamma - irradiate food must be clearly label and display the irradiation symbol , know as the “ radura .
" ( credit a , b
 modification of work by u . s . department of agriculture )
sonication
the use of high - frequency ultrasound wave to disrupt cell structure be call sonication .
application of ultrasound wave cause rapid change in pressure within the intracellular liquid  this lead to cavitation , the formation of bubble inside the cell , which can disrupt cell structure and eventually cause the cell to lyse or collapse .
sonication be useful in the laboratory for efficiently lyse cell to release - pron - content for further research  outside the laboratory , sonication be use for clean surgical instrument , lense , and a variety of other object such as coin , tool , and musical instrument .
filtration filtration be a method of physically separate microbe from sample .
air be commonly filter through highefficiency particulate air ( hepa ) filter ( figure one  three  .  one  five ) .
hepa filter have effective pore size of zero  .  three μm , small seven .
am johnson et al .
“
consumer acceptance of electron - beam irradiated ready - to - eat poultry meats .
" food processing preservation , two  eight no .
four ( two  zero  zero  four  )  three  zero  two – three  one  nine . five  seven  two chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five enough to capture bacterial cell , endospore , and many virus , as air pass through these filter , nearly sterilize the air on the other side of the filter .
hepa filter have a variety of application and be use widely in clinical setting , in car and airplane , and even in the home .
for example , - pron - may be find in vacuum cleaner , heating and air - conditioning system , and air purifier .
figure one  three  .  one  five ( a )
hepa filter like this one remove microbe , endospore , and virus as air flow through - pron - .
( b )
a schematic of a hepa filter .
( credit a  modification of work by csiro  credit b  modification of work by “ ladyofhats” / mariana ruiz villareal )
biological safety cabinets biological safety cabinet be a good example of the use of hepa filter .
hepa filter in biological safety cabinet ( bsc ) be use to remove particulate in the air either enter the cabinet ( air intake ) , leave the cabinet ( air exhaust ) , or treat both the intake and exhaust .
use of an air - intake hepa filter prevent environmental contaminant from enter the bsc , create a clean area for handle biological material .
use of an air - exhaust hepa filter prevent laboratory pathogen from contaminate the laboratory , thus maintain a safe work area for laboratory personnel .
there be three class of bsc  i , ii , and iii .
each class be design to provide a different level of protection for laboratory personnel and the environment  bsc ii and iii be also design to protect the material or device in the cabinet .
table one  three  .  one summarize the level of safety provide by each class of bsc for each bsl .
biological risks and bsc biological risk
assessed bsc class protection of personnel protection of environment protection of product bsl -  one , bsl -  two ,
bsl -  three i
yes yes
no bsl -  one , bsl -  two ,
bsl -  three ii
yes yes yes bsl -  four iii  ii when use in suit room with suit
yes
yes
yes table
one  three  .  one class i bsc protect laboratory worker and the environment from a low to moderate risk for exposure to biological chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  seven  three agent use in the laboratory .
air be draw into the cabinet and then filter before exit through the building 's exhaust system .
class ii bsc use directional air flow and partial barrier system to contain infectious agent .
class iii bsc be design for work with highly infectious agent like those use in bsl -  four laboratory .
- pron - be gas tight , and material enter or exit the cabinet must be pass through a double - door system , allow the intervene space to be decontaminate between use .
all air be pass through one or two hepa filter and an air incineration system before be exhaust directly to the outdoor ( not through the building 's exhaust system ) .
personnel can manipulate material inside the class iii cabinet by use long rubber glove seal to the cabinet .
this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two bscsdesvideo ) show how bsc be design and explain how - pron - protect personnel , the environment , and the product .
filtration in hospitals hepa filter be also commonly use in hospital and surgical suite to prevent contamination and the spread of airborne microbe through ventilation system .
hepa filtration system may be design for entire building or for individual room .
for example , burn unit , operating room , or isolation unit may require special hepa - filtration system to remove opportunistic pathogen from the environment because patient in these room be particularly vulnerable to infection .
membrane filters filtration can also be use to remove microbe from liquid sample use membrane filtration .
membrane filter for liquid function similarly to hepa filter for air .
typically , membrane filter that be use to remove bacteria have an effective pore size of zero  .  two μm , small than the average size of a bacterium ( one μm ) , but filter with small pore size be available for more specific need .
membrane filtration be useful for remove bacteria from various type of heatsensitive solution use in the laboratory , such as antibiotic solution and vitamin solution .
large volume of culture medium may also be filter sterilize rather than autoclave to protect heat - sensitive component .
often when filter small volume , syringe filter be use , but vacuum filter be typically use for filter large volume ( figure one  three  .  one  six ) .
link to learn five  seven  four chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  three  .  one  six
membrane filter come in a variety of size , depend on the volume of solution be filter .
( a ) larger volume be filter in unit like these .
the solution be draw through the filter by connect the unit to a vacuum .
( b )
small volume be often filter use syringe filter , which be unit that fit on the end of a syringe .
in this case , the solution be push through by depress the syringe 's plunger .
( credit a , b  modification of work by brian forster ) 
would membrane filtration with a zero  .  two  - μm filter likely remove virus from a solution ?
explain .

name at least two common use of hepa filtration in clinical or laboratory setting .
figure one  three  .  one  seven and figure one  three  .  one  eight summarize the physical method of control discuss in this section .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
five  seven  five figure one  three  .  one  seven
five  seven  six chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  three  .  one  eight one  three  .  three use chemical to control microorganisms learning objectives  understand and compare various chemical use to control microbial growth , include - pron - use , advantage and disadvantage , chemical structure , and mode of action
in addition to physical method of microbial control , chemical be also use to control microbial growth .
a wide variety of chemical can be use as disinfectant or antiseptic .
when choose which to use , - pron - be important to consider the type of microbe target  how clean the item need to be  the disinfectant 's effect on the item 's integrity  - pron - safety to animal , human , and the environment  - pron - expense  and - pron - ease of use .
this section describe the variety of chemical use as disinfectant and antiseptic , include - pron - mechanism of action and common use .
phenolic
in the one  eight  zero  zero , scientist begin experiment with a variety of chemical for disinfection .
in the one  eight  six  zero , british surgeon joseph lister ( one  eight  two  seven – one  nine  one  two ) begin use carbolic acid , know as phenol , as a disinfectant for the treatment of surgical wound ( see foundations of modern cell theory ) .
in one  eight  seven  nine , lister 's work inspire the american chemist joseph lawrence ( one  eight  three  six – one  nine  zero  nine ) to develop listerine , an alcohol - base mixture of several related compound that be still use today as an oral antiseptic .
today , carbolic acid be no longer use as a surgical disinfectant because - pron - be a skin irritant , but the chemical compound find in antiseptic mouthwash and throat lozenge be call phenolic .
chemically , phenol consist of a benzene ring with an –oh group , and phenolic be compound that have this group as part of - pron - chemical structure ( figure one  three  .  one  nine ) .
phenolic such as thymol and eucalyptol occur naturally in plant .
other phenolic can be derive from creosote , a component of coal tar .
phenolic tend to be stable , persistent on surface , and less toxic than phenol .
- pron - inhibit microbial growth by denature protein and disrupt membrane .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
five  seven  seven figure one  three  .  one  nine phenol and phenolic compound have be use to control microbial growth .
( a ) chemical structure of phenol , also know as carbolic acid .
( b ) o - phenylphenol , a type of phenolic , have be use as a disinfectant as well as to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvest citrus fruit .
( c ) hexachlorophene , another phenol , know as a bisphenol ( two ring ) , be the active ingredient in phisohex .
since lister 's time , several phenolic compound have be use to control microbial growth .
phenolic like cresol ( methylate phenol ) and o - phenylphenol be active ingredient in various formulation of lysol since - pron - invention in one  eight  eight  nine .
o
- phenylphenol be also commonly use in agriculture to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvest crop , especially citrus fruit , but - pron - use in the united states be now far more limited .
the bisphenol hexachlorophene , a disinfectant , be the active ingredient in phisohex , a topical cleansing detergent widely use for handwash in hospital setting .
phisohex be particularly effective against gram - positive bacteria , include those cause staphylococcal and streptococcal skin infection .
phisohex be formerly use for bathe infant , but this practice have be discontinue because - pron - have be show that exposure to hexachlorophene can lead to neurological problem .
triclosan be another bisphenol compound that have see widespread application in antibacterial product over the last several decade .
initially use in toothpaste , triclosan be now commonly use in hand soap and be frequently impregnate into a wide variety of other product , include cutting board , knife , shower curtain , clothing , and concrete , to make - pron - antimicrobial .
- pron - be particularly effective against gram - positive bacteria on the skin , as well as certain gram - negative bacteria and yeasts . [ eight ]
triclosan  antibacterial overkill ?
hand soap and other cleaning product be often market as “ antibacterial , " suggest that - pron - provide a level of cleanliness superior to that of conventional soap and cleanser .
but be the antibacterial ingredient in these product really safe and effective ?
about seven  five % of antibacterial liquid hand soap and three  zero % of bar soap contain the chemical triclosan , a phenolic , ( figure one  three  .  two  zero  ) . [ nine ]
triclosan block an enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid - biosynthesis pathway that be not find in the comparable human pathway .
although the use of triclosan in the home increase dramatically during the one  nine  nine  zero , more than four  zero year of research by the fda have turn up no conclusive evidence that wash with triclosan - contain product provide increase health benefit compare with washing with traditional soap .
although some study indicate that few bacteria may remain on a person 's hand after wash with triclosan - base soap , compare with traditional soap , no evidence point to any reduction in the transmission of bacteria that cause respiratory and gastrointestinal illness .
in short , soap with triclosan may remove or kill a few more germ but not enough to reduce the spread of disease .
perhaps more disturbing , some clear risk associate with triclosan - base soap have come to light .
the widespread use of triclosan have lead to an increase in triclosan - resistant bacterial strain , include those of clinical importance , such as salmonella enterica  this resistance may render triclosan useless as an antibacterial in the long run . [ one  zero ][ one  one ] bacteria can easily gain resistance to triclosan through a change to a single micro connections eight .
us food and drug administration .
“
triclosan  what consumer should know .
” two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . fda . gov / forconsumers / consumerupdates / ucm two  zero  five  nine  nine  nine  . htm .
accessed june nine , two  zero  one  six .
five  seven  eight chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five gene encode the target enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid - synthesis pathway .
other disinfectant with a less specific mode of action be much less prone to engender resistance because - pron - would take much more than a single genetic change .
use of triclosan over the last several decade have also lead to a buildup of the chemical in the environment .
triclosan in hand soap be directly introduce into wastewater and sewage system as a result of the handwashing process .
there , - pron - antibacterial property can inhibit or kill bacteria responsible for the decomposition of sewage , cause septic system to clog and back up .
eventually , triclosan in wastewater find - pron - way into surface water , stream , lake , sediment , and soil , disrupt natural population of bacteria that carry out important environmental function , such as inhibit algae .
triclosan also find - pron - way into the body of amphibian and fish , where - pron - can act as an endocrine disruptor .
detectable level of triclosan have also be find in various human bodily fluid , include breast milk , plasma , and urine . [ one  two ]
in fact , a study conduct by the cdc find detectable level of triclosan in the urine of seven  five % of two  ,  five  one  seven people test in two  zero  zero  three – two  zero  zero  four  . [ one  three ]
this finding be even more troubling give the evidence that triclosan may affect immune function in humans . [ one  four ]
in december two  zero  one  three , the fda give soap manufacturer until two  zero  one  six to prove that antibacterial soap provide a significant benefit over traditional soap  if unable to do so , manufacturer will be force to remove these product from the market .
figure one  three  .  two  zero
triclosan be a common ingredient in antibacterial soap despite evidence that - pron - pose environmental and health risk and offer no significant health benefit compare to conventional soap .
( credit b , c  modification of work by fda ) nine .
j . stromberg .
“
five reason
why - pron - should probably stop use antibacterial soap .
"
smithsonian . com january three , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . smithsonianmag . com / science - nature / five - reasons - why - you - should - probably - stop - using - antibacterial - soap -  one  eight  zero  nine  four  eight  zero  seven  eight  / ? no - ist .
accessed june nine , two  zero  one  six .
one  zero .
sp yazdankhah et al .
“
triclosan and antimicrobial resistance in bacteria  an overview .
"
microbial drug resistance one  two
no . two ( two  zero  zero  six  )  eight  three – nine  zero . one  one .
l . birošová , m . mikulášová .
“
development of triclosan and antibiotic resistance in salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium .
"
journal of medical microbiology five  eight
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  four  three  six – four  four  one . one  two .
ab dann , a . hontela .
“
triclosan  environmental exposure , toxicity and mechanisms of action .
" journal of applied toxicology three  one
no .
four ( two  zero  one  one  )  two  eight  five – three  one  one . one  three .
us centers for disease control and prevention .
“
triclosan fact sheet .
" two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . cdc . gov / biomonitoring / triclosan_factsheet . html .
accessed june nine , two  zero  one  six .
one  four .
em clayton et al .
"
the impact of bisphenol a and triclosan on immune parameters in the us population , nhanes two  zero  zero  three - two  zero  zero  six .
"
environmental health perspectives one  one  nine
no .
three
( two  zero  one  one  )  three  nine  zero .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  seven  nine

why be triclosan more like an antibiotic than a traditional disinfectant ?
heavy metal
some of the first chemical disinfectant and antiseptic to be use be heavy metal .
heavy metal kill microbe by bind to protein , thus inhibit enzymatic activity ( figure one  three  .  two  one ) .
heavy metal be oligodynamic , mean that very small concentration show significant antimicrobial activity .
ion of heavy metal bind to sulfur - contain amino acid strongly and bioaccumulate within cell , allow these metal to reach high localize concentration .
this cause protein to denature .
heavy metal be not selectively toxic to microbial cell .
- pron - may bioaccumulate in human or animal cell , as well , and excessive concentration can have toxic effect on human .
if too much silver accumulate in the body , for example , - pron - can result in a condition call argyria , in which the skin turn irreversibly blue - gray .
one way to reduce the potential toxicity of heavy metal be by carefully control the duration of exposure and concentration of the heavy metal .
figure one  three  .  two  one heavy metal denature protein , impair cell function and , thus , give - pron - strong antimicrobial property .
( a ) copper in fixture like this door handle kill microbe that otherwise may accumulate on frequently touch surface .
( b ) eating utensil contain small amount of silver to inhibit microbial growth .
( c ) copper commonly line incubator to minimize contamination of cell culture store inside .
( d ) antiseptic mouthwash commonly contain zinc chloride .
( e )
this patient be suffer from argyria , an irreversible condition cause by bioaccumulation of silver in the body .
( credit b  modification of work by “ shoshanah” / flickr  credit e  modification of work by herbert l . fred and hendrik a . van dijk )
mercury mercury be an example of a heavy metal that have be use for many year to control microbial growth .
- pron - be use for many century to treat syphilis .
mercury compound like mercuric chloride be mainly bacteriostatic and have a very broad spectrum of activity .
various form of mercury bind to sulfur - contain amino acid within protein , inhibit - pron - function .
in recent decade , the use of such compound have diminish because of mercury 's toxicity .
- pron - be toxic to the central nervous , digestive , and renal system at high concentration , and have negative environmental effect , include bioaccumulation in fish .
topical antiseptic such as mercurochrome , which contain mercury in low concentration , and merthiolate , a tincture ( a solution of mercury dissolve in alcohol ) be once commonly use .
however , because of concern about use mercury compound , these antiseptic be no longer sell in the united states .
five  eight  zero chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five silver silver have long be use as an antiseptic .
in ancient time , drinking water be store in silver jugs . [ one  five ]
silvadene cream be commonly use to treat topical wound and be particularly helpful in prevent infection in burn wound .
silver nitrate drop be once routinely apply to the eye of newborn to protect against ophthalmia neonatorum , eye infection that can occur due to exposure to pathogen in the birth canal , but antibiotic cream be more now commonly use .
silver be often combine with antibiotic , make the antibiotic thousand of time more effective . [ one  six ]
silver be also commonly incorporate into catheter and bandage , render - pron - antimicrobial  however , there be evidence that heavy metal may also enhance selection for antibiotic resistance . [ one  seven ] copper , nickel , and zinc several other heavy metal also exhibit antimicrobial activity .
copper sulfate be a common algicide use to control algal growth in swimming pool and fish tank .
the use of metallic copper to minimize microbial growth be also become more widespread .
copper lining in incubator help reduce contamination of cell culture .
the use of copper pot for water storage in underdeveloped country be be investigate as a way to combat diarrheal disease .
copper coating be also become popular for frequently handle object such as doorknobs , cabinet hardware , and other fixture in health - care facility in an attempt to reduce the spread of microbe .
nickel and zinc coating be now be use in a similar way .
other form of zinc , include zinc chloride and zinc oxide , be also use commercially .
zinc chloride be quite safe for human and be commonly find in mouthwash , substantially increase - pron - length of effectiveness .
zinc oxide be find in a variety of product , include topical antiseptic cream such as calamine lotion , diaper ointment , baby powder , and dandruff shampoo .

why be many heavy metal both antimicrobial and toxic to human ?
halogens
other chemical commonly use for disinfection be the halogen iodine , chlorine , and fluorine .
iodine work by oxidize cellular component , include sulfur - contain amino acid , nucleotide , and fatty acid , and destabilize the macromolecule that contain these molecule .
- pron - be often use as a topical tincture , but - pron - may cause staining or skin irritation .
an iodophor be a compound of iodine complexe with an organic molecule , thereby increase iodine 's stability and , in turn , - pron - efficacy .
one common iodophor be povidone - iodine , which include a wetting agent that release iodine relatively slowly .
betadine be a brand of povidone - iodine commonly use as a hand scrub by medical personnel before surgery and for topical antisepsis of a patient 's skin before incision ( figure one  three  .  two  two ) .
one  five .
n . silvestry - rodriguez et al .
“
silver as a disinfectant .
"
in reviews of environmental contamination and toxicology , pp .
two  three - four  five .
edit by gw ware and dm whitacre .
new york 
springer , two  zero  zero  seven .
one  six .
b . owens .
“
silver make
antibiotics thousands of times more effective .
"
nature june one  nine two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . nature . com / news / silvermakes - antibiotic - thousands - of - time - more - effective -  one  .  one  three  two  three  two one  seven .
c . seiler , tu berendonk .
“
heavy metal driven co - selection of antibiotic resistance in soil and water bodies impact by agriculture and aquaculture .
"
frontiers in microbiology three
( two  zero  one  two  )  three  nine  nine .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  eight  one figure one  three  .  two  two ( a )
betadine be a solution of the iodophor povidone - iodine .
( b )
- pron - be commonly use as a topical antiseptic on a patient 's skin before incision during surgery .
( credit b  modification of work by andrew ratto )
chlorine be another halogen commonly use for disinfection .
when chlorine gas be mixed with water , - pron - produce a strong oxidant call hypochlorous acid , which be uncharged and enter cell easily .
chlorine gas be commonly use in municipal drinking water and wastewater treatment plant , with the result hypochlorous acid produce the actual antimicrobial effect .
those work at water treatment facility need to take great care to minimize personal exposure to chlorine gas .
sodium hypochlorite be the chemical component of common household bleach , and - pron - be also use for a wide variety of disinfect purpose .
hypochlorite salt , include sodium and calcium hypochlorite , be use to disinfect swimming pool .
chlorine gas , sodium hypochlorite , and calcium hypochlorite be also commonly use disinfectant in the food processing and restaurant industry to reduce the spread of foodborne disease .
worker in these industry also need to take care to use these product correctly to ensure - pron - own safety as well as the safety of consumer .
a recent joint statement publish by the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) of the united nations and who indicate that none of the many beneficial use of chlorine product in food processing to reduce the spread of foodborne illness pose risk to consumers . [ one  eight ]
another class of chlorinated compound call chloramine be widely use as disinfectant .
chloramine be relatively stable , release chlorine over long period time .
chloramine be derivative of ammonia by substitution of one , two , or all three hydrogen atom with chlorine atom ( figure one  three  .  two  three ) .
figure one  three  .  two  three monochloroamine , one of the chloramine , be derive from ammonia by the replacement of one hydrogen atom with a chlorine atom .
chloramine and other cholorine compound may be use for disinfection of drinking water , and chloramine tablet be frequently use by the military for this purpose .
after a natural disaster or other event that compromise the public water supply , the cdc recommend disinfect tap water by add small amount of regular household bleach .
recent research suggest that sodium dichloroisocyanurate ( nadcc ) may also be a good alternative for drinking water disinfection .
currently , nadcc tablet be available for general use and for use by the military , camper , or those with emergency need  for these use , nadcc be preferable to chloramine tablet .
chlorine dioxide , a gaseous agent use for fumigation and sterilization of enclose area , be also commonly use for the disinfection of water .
although chlorinated compound be relatively effective disinfectant , - pron - have - pron - disadvantage .
some may irritate the skin , nose , or eye of some individual , and - pron - may not completely eliminate certain hardy organism one  eight .
world health organization .
“
benefits and risks of the use of chlorine - containing disinfectants in food production and food processing  report of a joint fao / who expert meeting .
”
geneva , switzerland 
world health organization , two  zero  zero  nine .
five  eight  two chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five from contaminate drinking water .
the protozoan parasite cryptosporidium , for example , have a protective outer shell that make - pron - resistant to chlorinated disinfectant .
thus , boil of drinking water in emergency situation be recommend when possible .
the halogen fluorine be also know to have antimicrobial property that contribute to the prevention of dental carie
( cavities ) . [ one  nine ]
fluoride be the main active ingredient of toothpaste and be also commonly add to tap water to help community maintain oral health .
chemically , fluoride can become incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel , make - pron - more resistant to corrosive acid produce by the fermentation of oral microbe .
fluoride also enhance the uptake of calcium and phosphate ion in tooth enamel , promote remineralization .
in addition to strengthen enamel , fluoride also seem to be bacteriostatic .
- pron - accumulate in plaque - form bacteria , interfere with - pron - metabolism and reduce - pron - production of the acid that contribute to tooth decay .

what be a benefit of a chloramine over hypochlorite for disinfecting ?
alcohols alcohol make up another group of chemical commonly use as disinfectant and antiseptic .
- pron - work by rapidly denature protein , which inhibit cell metabolism , and by disrupt membrane , which lead to cell lysis .
once denature , the protein may potentially refold if enough water be present in the solution .
alcohol be typically use at concentration of about seven  zero % aqueous solution and , in fact , work better in aqueous solution than one  zero  zero % alcohol solution .
this be because alcohol coagulate protein .
in high alcohol concentration , rapid coagulation of surface protein prevent effective penetration of cell .
the most commonly use alcohol for disinfection be ethyl alcohol ( ethanol ) and isopropyl alcohol ( isopropanol , rub alcohol )
( figure one  three  .  two  four ) .
alcohol tend to be bactericidal and fungicidal , but may also be viricidal for envelop virus only .
although alcohol be not sporicidal , - pron - do inhibit the process of sporulation and germination .
alcohol be volatile and dry quickly , but - pron - may also cause skin irritation because - pron - dehydrate the skin at the site of application .
one common clinical use of alcohol be swab the skin for degerme before needle injection .
alcohols also be the active ingredient in instant hand sanitizer , which have gain popularity in recent year .
the alcohol in these hand sanitizer work both by denature protein and by disrupt the microbial cell membrane , but will not work effectively in the presence of visible dirt .
last , alcohol be use to make tincture with other antiseptic , such as the iodine tincture discuss previously in this chapter .
all in all , alcohol be inexpensive and quite effective for the disinfection of a broad range of vegetative microbe .
however , one disadvantage of alcohol be - pron - high volatility , limit - pron - effectiveness to immediately after application .
one  nine .
re marquis .
“
antimicrobial actions of fluoride for oral bacteria .
" canadian journal of microbiology four  one
no .
one  one
( one  nine  nine  five  )  nine  five  five – nine  six  four .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  eight  three figure one  three  .  two  four ( a ) ethyl alcohol , the intoxicate ingredient find in alcoholic drink , be also use commonly as a disinfectant .
( b ) isopropyl alcohol , also call rubbing alcohol , have a related molecular structure and be another commonly use disinfectant .
( credit a photo  modification of work by d coetzee  credit b photo  modification of work by craig spurrier )

name at least three advantage of alcohol as disinfectant .

describe several specific application of alcohol use in disinfectant product .
surfactants surface - active agent , or surfactant , be a group of chemical compound that low the surface tension of water .
surfactant be the major ingredient in soap and detergent .
soap be salt of long - chain fatty acid and have both polar and nonpolar region , allow - pron - to interact with polar and nonpolar region in other molecule ( figure one  three  .  two  five ) .
- pron - can interact with nonpolar oil and grease to create emulsion in water , loosening and lift away dirt and microbe from surface and skin .
soap do not kill or inhibit microbial growth and so be not consider antiseptic or disinfectant .
however , proper use of soap mechanically carry away microorganism , effectively degerme a surface .
some soap contain add bacteriostatic agent such as triclocarban or cloflucarban , compound structurally relate to triclosan , that introduce antiseptic or disinfectant property to the soap .
figure one  three  .  two  five
soap be the salt ( sodium salt in the illustration ) of fatty acid and have the ability to emulsify lipid , fat , and oil by interact with water through - pron - hydrophilic head and with the lipid at - pron - hydrophobic tail .
soap , however , often form film that be difficult to rinse away , especially in hard water , which contain high concentration of calcium and magnesium mineral salt .
detergent contain synthetic surfactant molecule with both polar and nonpolar region that have strong cleansing activity but be more soluble , even in hard water , and , therefore , leave behind no soapy deposit .
anionic detergent , such as those use for laundry , have a negatively charge anion at one end attach to a long hydrophobic chain , whereas cationic detergent have a positively charge cation instead .
five  eight  four chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cationic detergent include an important class of disinfectant and antiseptic call the quaternary ammonium salt ( quat ) , name for the characteristic quaternary nitrogen atom that confer the positive charge ( figure one  three  .  two  six ) .
overall , quat have property similar to phospholipid , have hydrophilic and hydrophobic end .
as such , quat have the ability to insert into the bacterial phospholipid bilayer and disrupt membrane integrity .
the cationic charge of quat appear to confer - pron - antimicrobial property , which be diminish when neutralize .
quat have several useful property .
- pron - be stable , nontoxic , inexpensive , colorless , odorless , and tasteless .
- pron - tend to be bactericidal by disrupt membrane .
- pron - be also active against fungi , protozoan , and envelop virus , but endospore be unaffected .
in clinical setting , - pron - may be use as antiseptic or to disinfect surface .
mixture of quat be also commonly find in household cleaner and disinfectant , include many current formulation of lysol brand product , which contain benzalkonium chloride as the active ingredient .
benzalkonium chloride , along with the quat cetylpyrimidine chloride , be also find in product such as skin antiseptic , oral rinse , and mouthwash .
figure one  three  .  two  six
( a ) two common quat be benzylalkonium chloride and cetylpyrimidine chloride .
note the hydrophobic nonpolar carbon chain at one end and the nitrogen - contain cationic component at the other end .
( b ) quat be able to infiltrate the phospholipid plasma membrane of bacterial cell and disrupt - pron - integrity , lead to death of the cell .

why be soap not consider disinfectant ?
handwash the right way handwashing be critical for public health and should be emphasize in a clinical setting .
for the general public , the cdc recommend handwash before , during , and after food handling  before eat  before and after interact with someone who be ill  before and after treat a wound  after use the toilet or change diaper  after cough , sneeze , or blow the nose  after handle garbage  and after interact with an animal , - pron - micro connections chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  eight  five feed , or - pron - waste .
figure one  three  .  two  seven illustrate the five step of proper handwashing recommend by the cdc .
handwashing be even more important for health - care worker , who should wash - pron - hand thoroughly between every patient contact , after the removal of glove , after contact with bodily fluid and potentially infectious fomite , and before and after assist a surgeon with invasive procedure .
even with the use of proper surgical attire , include glove , scrub for surgery be more involved than routine handwashing .
the goal of surgical scrubbing be to reduce the normal microbiota on the skin 's surface to prevent the introduction of these microbe into a patient 's surgical wound .
there be no single widely accept protocol for surgical scrubbing .
protocol for length of time spend scrub may depend on the antimicrobial use  health - care worker should always check the manufacturer 's recommendation .
accord to the association of surgical technologists ( ast ) , surgical scrub may be perform with or without the use of brush ( figure one  three  .  two  seven ) .
figure one  three  .  two  seven
( a )
the cdc recommend five step as part of typical handwashing for the general public .
( b ) surgical scrubbing be more extensive , require scrub start from the fingertip , extend to the hand and forearm , and then up beyond the elbow , as show here .
( credit a  modification of work by world health organization ) five  eight  six chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five to learn more ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cdchandwash ) about proper handwashing , visit the cdc 's website .
bisbiguanides bisbiguanides be first synthesize in the two  zero th century and be cationic ( positively charge ) molecule know for - pron - antiseptic property ( figure one  three  .  two  eight ) .
one important bisbiguanide antiseptic be chlorhexidine .
- pron - have broad - spectrum activity against yeast , gram - positive bacteria , and gram - negative bacteria , with the exception of pseudomonas aeruginosa , which may develop resistance on repeat exposure . [ two  zero ] chlorhexidine disrupt cell membrane and be bacteriostatic at low concentration or bactericidal at high concentration , in which - pron - actually cause the cell ' cytoplasmic content to congeal .
- pron - also have activity against envelop virus .
however , chlorhexidine be poorly effective against mycobacterium tuberculosis and nonenvelope virus , and - pron - be not sporicidal .
chlorhexidine be typically use in the clinical setting as a surgical scrub and for other handwashing need for medical personnel , as well as for topical antisepsis for patient before surgery or needle injection .
- pron - be more persistent than iodophor , provide long - last antimicrobial activity .
chlorhexidine solution may also be use as oral rinse after oral procedure or to treat gingivitis .
another bisbiguanide , alexidine , be gain popularity as a surgical scrub and an oral rinse because - pron - act faster than chlorhexidine .
figure one  three  .  two  eight
the bisbiguanide chlorhexadine and alexidine be cationic antiseptic compound commonly use as surgical scrub .

what two effect do chlorhexidine have on bacterial cell ?
alkylate agents
the alkylate agent be a group of strong disinfecting chemical that act by replace a hydrogen atom within a molecule with an alkyl group ( cnh two n+ one ) , thereby inactivate enzyme and nucleic acid ( figure one  three  .  two  nine ) .
the alkylate agent formaldehyde ( ch two oh ) be commonly use in solution at a concentration of three  seven % ( know as formalin ) or as a gaseous disinfectant and biocide .
- pron - be a strong , broad - spectrum disinfectant and biocide that have the ability to kill bacteria , virus , fungus , and endospore , lead to sterilization at low temperature , which be sometimes a convenient alternative to the more labor - intensive heat sterilization method .
- pron - also cross - link protein and have be link to learning two  zero .
l . thomas et al .
“
development of resistance to chlorhexidine diacetate in pseudomonas aeruginosa and the effect of a ‘ residual ' concentration .
"
journal of hospital infection four  six
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  zero  )  two  nine  seven – three  zero  three .
chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  eight  seven widely use as a chemical fixative .
because of this , - pron - be use for the storage of tissue specimen and as an embalm fluid .
- pron - also have be use to inactivate infectious agent in vaccine preparation .
formaldehyde be very irritating to living tissue and be also carcinogenic  therefore , - pron - be not use as an antiseptic .
glutaraldehyde be structurally similar to formaldehyde but have two reactive aldehyde group , allow - pron - to act more quickly than formaldehyde .
- pron - be commonly use as a two % solution for sterilization and be market under the brand name cidex .
- pron - be use to disinfect a variety of surface and surgical and medical equipment .
however , similar to formaldehyde , glutaraldehyde irritate the skin and be not use as an antiseptic .
a new type of disinfectant gain popularity for the disinfection of medical equipment be o - phthalaldehyde ( opa ) , which be find in some new formulation of cidex and similar product , replace glutaraldehyde .
o -
phthalaldehyde also have two reactive aldehyde group , but - pron - be link by an aromatic bridge .
o - phthalaldehyde be think to work similarly to glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde , but be much less irritate to skin and nasal passage , produce a minimal odor , do not require processing before use , and be more effective against mycobacteria .
ethylene oxide be a type of alkylate agent that be use for gaseous sterilization .
- pron - be highly penetrate and can sterilize item within plastic bag such as catheter , disposable item in laboratory and clinical setting ( like package petri dish ) , and other piece of equipment .
ethylene oxide exposure be a form of cold sterilization , make - pron - useful for the sterilization of heat - sensitive item .
great care need to be take with the use of ethylene oxide , however  - pron - be carcinogenic , like the other alkylate agent , and be also highly explosive .
with careful use and proper aeration of the product after treatment , ethylene oxide be highly effective , and ethylene oxide sterilizer be commonly find in medical setting for sterilize package material .
β
- propionolactone be an alkylate agent with a different chemical structure than the other already discuss .
like other alkylate agent , β - propionolactone bind to dna , thereby inactivate - pron - ( figure one  three  .  two  nine ) .
- pron - be a clear liquid with a strong odor and have the ability to kill endospore .
as such , - pron - have be use in either liquid form or as a vapor for the sterilization of medical instrument and tissue graft , and - pron - be a common component of vaccine , use to maintain - pron - sterility .
- pron - have also be use for the sterilization of nutrient broth , as well as blood plasma , milk , and water .
- pron - be quickly metabolize by animal and human to lactic acid .
- pron - be also an irritant , however , and may lead to permanent damage of the eye , kidney , or liver .
additionally , - pron - have be show to be carcinogenic in animal  thus , precaution be necessary to minimize human exposure to β - propionolactone . [ two  one ] two  one .
institute of medicine .
“
long - term health effects of participation in project shad
( shipboard hazard and defense ) .
" washington , dc  the national academies press , two  zero  zero  seven .
five  eight  eight chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  three  .  two  nine ( a )
alkylate agent replace hydrogen atom with alkyl group .
here , guanine be alkylate , result in - pron - hydrogen bonding with thymine , instead of cytosine .
( b )
the chemical structure of several alkylate agent .

what chemical reaction do alkylate agent participate in ?

why be alkylate agent not use as antiseptic ?
diehard prions prions , the acellular , misfolde protein responsible for incurable and fatal disease such as kuru and creutzfeldt - jakob disease ( see viroids , virusoid , and prions ) , be notoriously difficult to destroy .
prion be extremely resistant to heat , chemical , and radiation .
- pron - be also extremely infectious and deadly  thus , handling and dispose of prion - infect item require extensive training and extreme caution .
typical method of disinfection can reduce but not eliminate the infectivity of prion .
autoclaving be not completely effective , nor be chemical such as phenol , alcohol , formalin , and β - propiolactone .
even when fix in formalin , affect brain and spinal cord tissue remain infectious .
personnel who handle contaminate specimen or equipment or work with infect patient must wear a protective coat , face protection , and cut - resistant glove .
any contact with skin must be immediately wash with detergent and warm water without scrub .
the skin should then be wash with one n naoh or a one   one  zero dilution of bleach for one minute .
contaminated waste must be incinerate or autoclave in a strong basic micro connections chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  eight  nine solution , and instrument must be clean and soak in a strong basic solution .
for more information on the handling of animal and prion - contaminate material , visit the guideline publish on the cdc ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two cdchandanipri ) and who ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two whohandanipri ) website .
peroxygen peroxygen be strong oxidize agent that can be use as disinfectant or antiseptic .
the most widely use peroxygen be hydrogen peroxide ( h two o two ) , which be often use in solution to disinfect surface and may also be use as a gaseous agent .
hydrogen peroxide solution be inexpensive skin antiseptic that break down into water and oxygen gas , both of which be environmentally safe .
this decomposition be accelerate in the presence of light , so hydrogen peroxide solution typically be sell in brown or opaque bottle .
one disadvantage of use hydrogen peroxide as an antiseptic be that - pron - also cause damage to skin that may delay healing or lead to scar .
contact lens cleaner often include hydrogen peroxide as a disinfectant .
hydrogen peroxide work by produce free radical that damage cellular macromolecule .
hydrogen peroxide have broad - spectrum activity , work against gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria ( with slightly great efficacy against gram - positive bacteria ) , fungus , virus , and endospore .
however , bacteria that produce the oxygendetoxifye enzyme catalase or peroxidase may have inherent tolerance to low hydrogen peroxide concentration ( figure one  three  .  three  zero ) .
to kill endospore , the length of exposure or concentration of solution of hydrogen peroxide must be increase .
gaseous hydrogen peroxide have great efficacy and can be use as a sterilant for room or equipment .
figure one  three  .  three  zero catalase enzymatically convert highly reactive hydrogen peroxide ( h two o two ) into water and oxygen .
hydrogen peroxide can be use to clean wound .
hydrogen peroxide be use to sterilize item such as contact lense .
( credit photo  modification of work by kerry ceszyk ) plasma , a hot , ionize gas , describe as the fourth state of matter , be useful for sterilize equipment because - pron - penetrate surface and kill vegetative cell and endospore .
hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid , another commonly use peroxygen , each may be introduce as a plasma .
peracetic acid can be use as a liquid or plasma sterilant insofar as - pron - readily kill endospore , be more effective than hydrogen peroxide even at rather low concentration , and be immune to inactivation by catalase and peroxidase .
- pron - also break down to environmentally link to learn five  nine  zero chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five innocuous compound  in this case , acetic acid and oxygen .
other example of peroxygen include benzoyl peroxide and carbamide peroxide .
benzoyl peroxide be a peroxygen that use in acne medication solution .
- pron - kill the bacterium propionibacterium acne , which be associate with acne .
carbamide peroxide , an ingredient use in toothpaste , be a peroxygen that combat oral biofilm that cause tooth discoloration and halitosis ( bad breath ) . [ two  two ]
last , ozone gas be a peroxygen with disinfectant quality and be use to clean air or water supply .
overall , peroxygen be highly effective and commonly use , with no associated environmental hazard .

how do peroxide kill cell ?
supercritical fluids
within the last one  five year , the use of supercritical fluid , especially supercritical carbon dioxide ( scco two ) , have gain popularity for certain sterilizing application .
when carbon dioxide be bring to approximately one  zero time atmospheric pressure , - pron - reach a supercritical state that have physical property between those of liquid and gas .
material put into a chamber in which carbon dioxide be pressurize in this way can be sterilize because of the ability of scco two to penetrate surface .
supercritical carbon dioxide work by penetrate cell and form carbonic acid , thereby lower the cell ph considerably .
this technique be effective against vegetative cell and be also use in combination with peracetic acid to kill endospore .
- pron - efficacy can also be augment with increase temperature or by rapid cycle of pressurization and depressurization , which more likely produce cell lysis .
benefit of scco two include the nonreactive , nontoxic , and nonflammable property of carbon dioxide , and this protocol be effective at low temperature .
unlike other method , such as heat and irradiation , that can degrade the object be sterilize , the use of scco two preserve the object 's integrity and be commonly use for treat food ( include spice and juice ) and medical device such as endoscope .
- pron - be also gain popularity for disinfect tissue such as skin , bone , tendon , and ligament prior to transplantation .
scco two can also be use for p control because - pron - can kill insect egg and larvae within product .

why be the use of supercritical carbon dioxide gain popularity for commercial and medical use ?
chemical food preservatives chemical preservative be use to inhibit microbial growth and minimize spoilage in some food .
commonly use chemical preservative include sorbic acid , benzoic acid , and propionic acid , and - pron - more soluble salt potassium sorbate , sodium benzoate , and calcium propionate , all of which be use to control the growth of mold in acidic food .
each of these preservative be nontoxic and readily metabolize by human .
- pron - be also flavorless , so - pron - do not compromise the flavor of the food - pron - preserve .
sorbic and benzoic acid exhibit increase efficacy as the ph decrease .
sorbic acid be think to work by inhibit various cellular enzyme , include those in the citric acid cycle , as well as catalase and peroxidase .
- pron - be add as a preservative in a wide variety of food , include dairy , bread , fruit , and vegetable product .
benzoic acid be find two  two .
yao , c . s . et al .
"
in vitro antibacterial effect of carbamide peroxide on oral biofilm .
” journal of oral microbiology jun one  two , two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / article / pmc three  six  eight  two  zero  eight  seven  / . doi 
one  zero  .  three  four  zero  two  / jom . v five i zero  .  two  zero  three  nine  two .
chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  nine  one naturally in many type of fruit and berry , spice , and ferment product .
- pron - be think to work by decrease intracellular ph , interfere with mechanism such as oxidative phosphorylation and the uptake of molecule such as amino acid into cell .
food preserve with benzoic acid or sodium benzoate include fruit juice , jam , ice cream , pastry , soft drink , chew gum , and pickle .
propionic acid be think to both inhibit enzyme and decrease intracellular ph , work similarly to benzoic acid .
however , propionic acid be a more effective preservative at a high ph than either sorbic acid or benzoic acid .
propionic acid be naturally produce by some cheese during - pron - ripening and be add to other type of cheese and bake good to prevent mold contamination .
- pron - be also add to raw dough to prevent contamination by the bacterium bacillus mesentericus , which cause bread to become ropy .
other commonly use chemical preservative include sulfur dioxide and nitrite .
sulfur dioxide prevent browning of food and be use for the preservation of dry fruit  - pron - have be use in winemaking since ancient time .
sulfur dioxide gas dissolve in water readily , form sulfite .
although sulfite can be metabolize by the body , some people have sulfite allergy , include asthmatic reaction .
additionally , sulfite degrade thiamine , an important nutrient in some food .
the mode of action of sulfite be not entirely clear , but - pron - may interfere with the disulfide bond ( see figure seven  .  two  one ) formation in protein , inhibit enzymatic activity .
alternatively , - pron - may reduce the intracellular ph of the cell , interfere with proton motive force - drive mechanism .
nitrite be add to process meat to maintain color and stop the germination of clostridium botulinum endospore .
nitrite be reduce to nitric oxide , which react with heme group and iron - sulfur group .
when nitric oxide react with the heme group within the myoglobin of meat , a red product form , give meat - pron - red color .
alternatively , - pron - be think that when nitric acid react with the iron - sulfur enzyme ferredoxin within bacteria , this electron transport - chain carrier be destroy , prevent atp synthesis .
nitrosamines , however , be carcinogenic and can be produce through exposure of nitrite - preserve meat ( e . g . , hot dog , lunch meat , breakfast sausage , bacon , meat in canned soup ) to heat during cooking .
natural chemical food preservatives
the discovery of natural antimicrobial substance produce by other microbe have add to the arsenal of preservative use in food .
nisin be an antimicrobial peptide produce by the bacterium lactococcus lactis and be particularly effective against gram - positive organism .
nisin work by disrupt cell wall production , leave cell more prone to lysis .
- pron - be use to preserve cheese , meat , and beverage .
natamycin be an antifungal macrolide antibiotic produce by the bacterium streptomyce natalensis .
- pron - be approve by the fda in one  nine  eight  two and be use to prevent fungal growth in various type of dairy product , include cottage cheese , slice cheese , and shred cheese .
natamycin be also use for meat preservation in country outside the united states .

what be the advantage and drawback of use sulfite and nitrite as food preservative ?
chemical disinfectants chemical mode of action example use phenolics five  nine  two chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five chemical disinfectants chemical mode of action example
use cresols
o - phenylphenol hexachlorophene triclosan denature protein and disrupt membrane
disinfectant in lysol prevent contamination of crop ( citrus )
antibacterial soap phisohex for handwash in hospital metals mercury silver copper nickel zinc bind to protein and inhibit enzyme activity topical antiseptic treatment of wound and burn prevention of eye infection in newborn antibacterial in catheter and bandage mouthwash algicide for pool and fish tank
containers for long - term water storage halogens iodine chlorine fluorine oxidation and destabilization of cellular macromolecule topical antiseptic hand scrub for medical personnel water disinfectant water treatment plant household bleach food processing prevention of dental carry alcohols ethanol isopropanol denature protein and disrupt membrane disinfectant antiseptic surfactants quaternary ammonium salt lower surface tension of water to help with washing away of microbe , and disruption of cell membrane soap and detergent disinfectant antiseptic mouthwash bisbiguanide chlorhexidine alexidine disruption of cell membrane
oral rinse hand scrub for medical personnel
alkylate agents chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  nine  three chemical disinfectants chemical mode of action example use
formaldehyde glutaraldehyde
o - phthalaldehyde ethylene oxide β - propionolactone inactivation of enzyme and nucleic acid disinfectant tissue specimen storage embalming sterilization of medical equipment vaccine component for sterility peroxygen hydrogen peroxide peracetic acid benzoyl peroxide carbamide peroxide ozone gas oxidation and destabilization of cellular macromolecule antiseptic disinfectant acne medication toothpaste ingredient supercritical gases carbon dioxide penetrates cell , form carbonic acid , lower intracellular ph food preservation disinfection of medical device
disinfection of transplant tissue chemical food preservative sorbic acid benzoic
acid propionic acid potassium sorbate
sodium benzoate
calcium propionate sulfur dioxide nitrites decrease ph and inhibit enzymatic function preservation of food product natural food preservatives nisin natamycin inhibition of cell wall synthesis ( nisin ) preservation of dairy product , meat , and beverage five  nine  four chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five one  three  .  four test the effectiveness of antiseptics and disinfectants
learning objectives
 describe why the phenol coefficient be use  compare and contrast the disk - diffusion , use - dilution , and in - use method for test the effectiveness of antiseptic , disinfectant , and sterilant the effectiveness of various chemical disinfectant be reflect in the term use to describe - pron - .
chemical disinfectant be group by the power of - pron - activity , with each category reflect the type of microbe and viruse - pron - component disinfectant be effective against .
high - level germicide have the ability to kill vegetative cell , fungus , virus , and endospore , lead to sterilization , with extended use .
intermediate - level germicide , as - pron - name suggest , be less effective against endospore and certain virus , and low - level germicide kill only vegetative cell and certain envelop virus , and be ineffective against endospore .
however , several environmental condition influence the potency of an antimicrobial agent and - pron - effectiveness .
for example , length of exposure be particularly important , with long exposure increase efficacy .
similarly , the concentration of the chemical agent be also important , with high concentration be more effective than low one .
temperature , ph , and other factor can also affect the potency of a disinfect agent .
one method to determine the effectiveness of a chemical agent include swab surface before and after use to confirm whether a sterile field be maintain during use .
additional test be describe in the section that follow .
these test allow for the maintenance of appropriate disinfection protocol in clinical setting , control microbial growth to protect patient , health - care worker , and the community .
phenol coefficient
the effectiveness of a disinfectant or antiseptic can be determine in a number of way .
historically , a chemical agent 's effectiveness be often compare with that of phenol , the first chemical agent use by joseph lister .
in one  nine  zero  three , british chemist samuel rideal ( one  eight  six  three – one  nine  two  nine ) and j . t . ainslie walker ( one  eight  six  eight – one  nine  three  zero ) establish a protocol to compare the effectiveness of a variety of chemical with that of phenol , use as - pron - test organism staphylococcus aureus ( a gram - positive bacterium ) and salmonella enterica serovar typhi ( a gram - negative bacterium ) .
- pron - expose the test bacteria to the antimicrobial chemical solution dilute in water for seven  .  five minute .
- pron - then calculate a phenol coefficient for each chemical for each of the two bacteria test .
a phenol coefficient of one  .  zero mean that the chemical agent have about the same level of effectiveness as phenol .
a chemical agent with a phenol coefficient of less than one  .  zero be less effective than phenol .
an example be formalin , with phenol coefficient of zero  .  three ( s . aureus ) and zero  .  seven ( s . enterica serovar typhi ) .
a chemical agent with a phenol coefficient great than one  .  zero be more effective than phenol , such as chloramine , with phenol coefficient of one  three  three and one  zero  zero , respectively .
although the phenol coefficient be once a useful measure of effectiveness , - pron - be no longer commonly use because the condition and organism use be arbitrarily choose .

what be the difference between the three level of disinfectant effectiveness ?
disk - diffusion method
the disk - diffusion method involve apply different chemical to separate , sterile filter paper disk ( figure one  three  .  three  one ) .
the disk be then place on an agar plate that have be inoculate with the targeted bacterium and the chemical diffuse out of the disk into the agar where the bacteria have be inoculate .
as the “ lawn " of bacteria chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  nine  five grow , zone of inhibition of microbial growth be observe as clear area around the disk .
although there be other factor that contribute to the size of zone of inhibition ( e . g . , whether the agent be water soluble and able to diffuse in the agar ) , large zone typically correlate to increase inhibition effectiveness of the chemical agent .
the diameter across each zone be measure in millimeter .
figure one  three  .  three  one
a disk - diffusion assay be use to determine the effectiveness of chemical agent against a particular microbe .
( a )
a plate be inoculate with various antimicrobial disc .
the zone of inhibition around each disc indicate how effective that antimicrobial be against the particular specie be test .
( b )
on these plate , four antimicrobial agent be test for efficacy in kill pseudomonas aeruginosa ( leave ) and staphylococcus aureus ( right ) .
these antimicrobial be much more effective at kill s . aureus , as indicate by the size of the zone of inhibition .
( credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology )

when compare the activity of two disinfectant against the same microbe , use the disk - diffusion assay , and assume both be water soluble and can easily diffuse in the agar , would a more effective disinfectant have a large zone of inhibition or a small one ?
use - dilution test
other method be also use for measure the effectiveness of a chemical agent in clinical setting .
the use - dilution test be commonly use to determine a chemical 's disinfection effectiveness on an inanimate surface .
for this test , a cylinder of stainless steel be dip in a culture of the target microorganism and then dry .
the cylinder be then dip in solution of disinfectant at various concentration for a specify amount of time .
finally , the cylinder be transfer to a new test tube contain fresh sterile medium that do not contain disinfectant , and this test tube be incubate .
bacterial survival be demonstrate by the presence of turbidity in the medium , whereas kill of the target organism on the cylinder by the disinfectant will produce no turbidity .
the association of official agricultural chemists international ( aoac ) , a nonprofit group that establish many protocol standard , have determine that a minimum of five  nine of six  zero replicate must show no growth in such a test to achieve a pass result , and the result must be repeatable from different batch of disinfectant and when perform on different day .
disinfectant manufacturer perform use - dilution test to validate the efficacy claim for - pron - product , as designate by the epa .
five  nine  six chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
be the use - dilution test perform in a clinical setting ?
why ?
in - use
test an in - use test can determine whether an actively use solution of disinfectant in a clinical setting be microbially contaminate ( figure one  three  .  three  two ) .
a one  - ml sample of the use disinfectant be dilute into nine ml of sterile broth medium that also contain a compound to inactivate the disinfectant .
ten drop , total approximately zero  .  two ml of this mixture , be then inoculate onto each of two agar plate .
one plate be incubate at three  seven ° c for three day and the other be incubate at room temperature for seven day .
the plate be monitor for growth of microbial colony .
growth of five or more colony on either plate suggest that viable microbial cell exist in the disinfectant solution and that - pron - be contaminate .
such in - use test monitor the effectiveness of disinfectant in the clinical setting .
figure one  three  .  three  two used disinfectant solution in a clinical setting can be check with the in - use test for contamination with microbe .

what do a positive in - use test indicate ?
resolution
despite antibiotic treatment , roberta 's symptom worsen .
- pron - develop pyelonephritis , a severe kidney clinical focus chapter one  three  control of microbial growth five  nine  seven infection , and be rehospitalize in the intensive care unit ( icu ) .
- pron - condition continue to deteriorate , and - pron - develop symptom of septic shock .
at this point , - pron - physician order a culture from - pron - urine to determine the exact cause of - pron - infection , as well as a drug sensitivity test to determine what antibiotic would be effective against the causative bacterium .
the result of this test indicate resistance to a wide range of antibiotic , include the carbapenem , a class of antibiotic that be use as the last resort for many type of bacterial infection .
this be an alarming outcome , suggest that roberta 's infection be cause by a so - call superbug  a bacterial strain that have develop resistance to the majority of commonly use antibiotic .
in this case , the causative agent belong to the carbapenem - resistant enterobacteriaceae ( cre ) , a drug - resistant family of bacteria normally find in the digestive system ( figure one  three  .  three  three ) .
when cre be introduce to other body system , as may occur through improperly clean surgical instrument , catheter , or endoscope , aggressive infection can occur .
cre infection be notoriously difficult to treat , with a four  zero %– five  zero % fatality rate .
to treat - pron - kidney infection and septic shock , roberta be treat with dialysis , intravenous fluid , and medication to maintain blood pressure and prevent blood clotting .
- pron - be also start on aggressive treatment with intravenous administration of a new drug call tigecycline , which have be successful in treat infection cause by drug - resistant bacteria .
after several week in the icu , roberta recover from - pron - cre infection .
however , public health official soon notice that roberta 's case be not isolate .
several patient who undergo similar procedure at the same hospital also develop cre infection , some die as a result .
ultimately , the source of the infection be trace to the duodenoscope use in the procedure .
despite the hospital staff meticulously follow manufacturer protocol for disinfection , bacteria , include cre , remain within the instrument and be introduce to patient during procedure .
figure one  three  .  three  three cre be an extremely drug - resistant strain of bacteria that be typically associate with nosocomial infection .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention ) go back to the previous clinical focus box .
five  nine  eight chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
who be responsible ?
carbapenem - resistant enterobacteriaceae infection due to contaminate endoscope have become a highprofile problem in recent year .
several cre outbreak have be trace to endoscope , include a case at ronald reagan ucla medical center in early two  zero  one  five in which one  seven  nine patient may have be expose to a contaminated endoscope .
seven of the patient develop infection , and two later die .
several lawsuit have be file against olympus , the manufacturer of the endoscope .
some claim that olympus do not obtain fda approval for design change that may have lead to contamination , and other claim that the manufacturer knowingly withhold information from hospital concern defect in the endoscope .
lawsuit like these raise difficult - to - answer question about liability .
invasive procedure be inherently risky , but negative outcome can be minimize by strict adherence to establish protocol .
who be responsible , however , when negative outcome occur due to flawed protocol or faulty equipment ?
can hospital or healthcare worker be hold liable if - pron - have strictly follow a flawed procedure ?
should manufacturer be hold liable - and perhaps be drive out of business - if - pron - lifesave equipment fail or be find defective ?
what be the government 's role in ensure that use and maintenance of medical equipment and protocol be fail - safe ?
protocol for clean or sterilize medical equipment be often develop by government agency like the fda , and other group , like the aoac , a nonprofit scientific organization that establish many protocol for standard use globally .
these procedure and protocol be then adopt by medical device and equipment manufacturer .
ultimately , the end - user ( hospital and - pron - staff ) be responsible for follow these procedure and can be hold liable if a breach occur and patient become ill from improperly clean equipment .
unfortunately , protocol be not infallible , and sometimes - pron - take negative outcome to reveal - pron - flaw .
in two  zero  zero  eight , the fda have approve a disinfection protocol for endoscope , use glutaraldehyde ( at a low concentration when mix with phenol ) , o - phthalaldehyde , hydrogen peroxide , peracetic acid , and a mix of hydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid .
however , subsequent cre outbreak from endoscope use show that this protocol alone be inadequate .
as a result of cre outbreak , hospital , manufacturer , and the fda be investigate solution .
many hospital be institute more rigorous cleaning procedure than those mandate by the fda .
manufacturer be look for way to redesign duodenoscope to minimize hard - to - reach crevice where bacteria can escape disinfectant , and the fda be update - pron - protocol .
in february two  zero  one  five , the fda add new recommendation for careful hand cleaning of the duodenoscope elevator mechanism ( the location where microbe be most likely to escape disinfection ) , and issue more careful documentation about quality control of disinfection protocol ( figure one  three  .  three  four ) .
there be no guarantee that new procedure , protocol , or equipment will completely eliminate the risk for infection associate with endoscope .
yet these device be use successfully in five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – six  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero procedure annually in the united states , many of - pron - lifesave .
at what point do the risk outweigh the benefit of these device , and who should be hold responsible when negative outcome occur ?
eye on ethics chapter one  three
 control of microbial growth five  nine  nine figure one  three  .  three  four
the elevator mechanism in a duodenoscope contain crevice that be difficult to disinfect .
pathogen that survive disinfection protocol can be pass from one patient to another , cause serious infection .
( credit " photo
" 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
summary one  three  .  one control microbial growth
 inanimate item that may harbor microbe and aid in - pron - transmission be call fomite .
the level of cleanliness require for a fomite depend both on the item 's use and the infectious agent with which the item may be contaminate .

the cdc and the nih have establish four biological safety level ( bsl ) for laboratory perform research on infectious agent .
each level be design to protect laboratory personnel and the community .
these bsl be determine by the agent 's infectivity , ease of transmission , and potential disease severity , as well as the type of work be perform with the agent .

disinfection remove potential pathogen from a fomite , whereas antisepsis use antimicrobial chemical safe enough for tissue  in both case , microbial load be reduce , but microbe may remain unless the chemical use be strong enough to be a sterilant .

the amount of cleanliness ( sterilization versus high - level disinfection versus general cleanliness ) require for item use clinically depend on whether the item will come into contact with sterile tissue ( critical item ) , mucous membrane ( semicritical item ) , or intact skin ( noncritical item ) .
 medical procedure with a risk for contamination should be carry out in a sterile field maintain by proper aseptic technique to prevent sepsis .

sterilization be necessary for some medical application as well as in the food industry , where endospore of six  zero  zero chapter one  three  control of microbial growth
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five clostridium botulinum be kill through commercial sterilization protocol .
 physical or chemical method to control microbial growth that result in death of the microbe be indicate by the suffix - cide or - cidal
( e . g . , as with bactericide , viricide , and fungicide ) , whereas those that inhibit microbial growth be indicate by the suffix - stat or - static ( e . g . , bacteriostatic , fungistatic ) .
 microbial death curve display the logarithmic decline of living microbe expose to a method of microbial control .
the time - pron - take for a protocol to yield a one  - log ( nine  zero % ) reduction in the microbial population be the decimal reduction time , or d - value .

when choose a microbial control protocol , factor to consider include the length of exposure time , the type of microbe target , - pron - susceptibility to the protocol , the intensity of the treatment , the presence of organic that may interfere with the protocol , and the environmental condition that may alter the effectiveness of the protocol .
one  three  .  two use physical methods to control microorganisms

heat be a widely used and highly effective method for control microbial growth .
 dry - heat sterilization protocol be use commonly in aseptic technique in the laboratory .
however , moistheat sterilization be typically the more effective protocol because - pron - penetrate cell well than dry heat do .

pasteurization be use to kill pathogen and reduce the number of microbe that cause food spoilage .
hightemperature , short - time pasteurization be commonly use to pasteurize milk that will be refrigerate  ultrahigh temperature pasteurization can be use to pasteurize milk for long - term storage without refrigeration .

refrigeration slow microbial growth  freezing stop growth , kill some organism .
laboratory and medical specimen may be freeze on dry ice or at ultra - low temperature for storage and transport .
 high - pressure processing can be use to kill microbe in food .
hyperbaric oxygen therapy to increase oxygen saturation have also be use to treat certain infection .
 desiccation have long be use to preserve food and be accelerate through the addition of salt or sugar , which decrease water activity in food .
 lyophilization combine cold exposure and desiccation for the long - term storage of food and laboratory material , but microbe remain and can be rehydrate .

ionizing radiation , include gamma irradiation , be an effective way to sterilize heat - sensitive and package material .
nonionize radiation , like ultraviolet light , be unable to penetrate surface but be useful for surface sterilization .
 hepa filtration be commonly use in hospital ventilation system and biological safety cabinet in laboratory to prevent transmission of airborne microbe .
membrane filtration be commonly use to remove bacteria from heat - sensitive solution .
one  three  .  three
use chemical to control microorganisms

heavy metal , include mercury , silver , copper , and zinc , have long be use for disinfection and preservation , although some have toxicity and environmental risk associate with - pron - .

halogens , include chlorine , fluorine , and iodine , be also commonly use for disinfection .
chlorine compound , include sodium hypochlorite , chloramine , and chlorine dioxide , be commonly use for water disinfection .
iodine , in both tincture and iodophor form , be an effective antiseptic .

alcohols , include ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol , be commonly use antiseptic that act by denature protein and disrupt membrane .

phenolics be stable , long - act disinfectant that denature protein and disrupt membrane .
- pron - be commonly find in household cleaner , mouthwash , and hospital disinfectant , and be also use to preserve harvest crop .

the phenolic compound triclosan , find in antibacterial soap , plastic , and textiles be technically an antibiotic because of - pron - specific mode of action of inhibit bacterial fatty - acid synthesis . .
 surfactants , include soap and detergent , lower the surface tension of water to create emulsion that mechanically carry away microbe .
soap be long - chain fatty acid , whereas detergent be synthetic chapter one  three  control of microbial growth six  zero  one surfactant .

quaternary ammonium compound ( quat ) be cationic detergent that disrupt membrane .
- pron - be use in household cleaner , skin disinfectant , oral rinse , and mouthwash .

bisbiguanides disrupt cell membrane , cause cell content to gel .
chlorhexidine and alexidine be commonly use for surgical scrub , for handwash in clinical setting , and in prescription oral rinse .

alkylate agent effectively sterilize material at low temperature but be carcinogenic and may also irritate tissue .
glutaraldehyde and o - phthalaldehyde be use as hospital disinfectant but not as antiseptic .
formaldehyde be use for the storage of tissue specimen , as an embalm fluid , and in vaccine preparation to inactivate infectious agent .
ethylene oxide be a gas sterilant that can permeate heat - sensitive package material , but - pron - be also explosive and carcinogenic .

peroxygens , include hydrogen peroxide , peracetic acid , benzoyl peroxide , and ozone gas , be strong oxidize agent that produce free radical in cell , damage - pron - macromolecule .
- pron - be environmentally safe and be highly effective disinfectant and antiseptic .
 pressurize carbon dioxide in the form of a supercritical fluid easily permeate package material and cell , form carbonic acid and lower intracellular ph . supercritical carbon dioxide be nonreactive , nontoxic , nonflammable , and effective at low temperature for sterilization of medical device , implant , and transplant tissue .

chemical preservative be add to a variety of food .
sorbic acid , benzoic acid , propionic acid , and - pron - more soluble salt inhibit enzyme or reduce intracellular ph .

sulfites be use in winemaking and food processing to prevent browning of food .

nitrites be use to preserve meat and maintain color , but cook nitrite - preserve meat may produce carcinogenic nitrosamine .

nisin and natamycin be naturally produce preservative use in cheese and meat .
nisin be effective against gram - positive bacteria and natamycin against fungi .
one  three  .  four test the effectiveness of antiseptics and disinfectants 
chemical disinfectant be group by the type of microbe and infectious agent - pron - be effective against .
high - level germicide kill vegetative cell , fungus , virus , and endospore , and can ultimately lead to sterilization .
intermediate - level germicide can not kill all virus and be less effective against endospore .
low - level germicide kill vegetative cell and some envelop virus , but be ineffective against endospore .

the effectiveness of a disinfectant be influence by several factor , include length of exposure , concentration of disinfectant , temperature , and ph .

historically , the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant be compare with that of phenol at kill staphylococcus aureus and salmonella enterica serovar typhi , and a phenol coefficient be calculate .

the disk - diffusion method be use to test the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant against a particular microbe .

the use - dilution test determine the effectiveness of a disinfectant on a surface .
in - use test can determine whether disinfectant solution be be use correctly in clinical setting .
chapter one  four antimicrobial drugs figure one  four  .  one first mass produce in the one  nine  four  zero , penicillin be instrumental in save million of life during world war ii and be consider a wonder
drug . [ one ]
today , overprescription of antibiotic ( especially for childhood illness ) have contribute to the evolution of drug - resistant pathogen .
( credit leave  modification of work by chemical heritage foundation  credit right 
modification of work by u . s . department of defense ) chapter outline one  four  .  one history of chemotherapy and antimicrobial discovery one  four  .  two fundamentals of antimicrobial chemotherapy one  four  .  three mechanisms of antibacterial drugs one  four  .  four mechanisms of
other antimicrobial drug one  four  .  five drug resistance one  four  .  six test the effectiveness of antimicrobials one  four  .  seven current strategies for antimicrobial discovery introduction
in nature , some microbe produce substance that inhibit or kill other microbe that may otherwise compete for the same resource .
human have successfully exploit these ability , use microbe to mass - produce substance that can be use as antimicrobial drug .
since - pron - discovery , antimicrobial drug have save countless life , and - pron - remain an essential tool for treat and control infectious disease .
but - pron - widespread and often unnecessary use have have an unintended side effect  the rise of multidrug - resistant microbial strain .
in this chapter , - pron - will discuss how antimicrobial drug work , why microbe develop resistance , and what health professional can do to encourage responsible use of antimicrobial .
one  four  .  one history of chemotherapy and antimicrobial one .
“
treatment of war wounds  a historical review .
" clinical orthopaedics and related research four  six  seven
no .
eight
( two  zero  zero  nine  )  two  one  six  eight – two  one  nine  one .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
six  zero  seven discovery learning objectives
 compare and contrast natural , semisynthetic , and synthetic antimicrobial drug
 describe the chemotherapeutic approach of ancient society
 describe the historically important individual and event that lead to the development of antimicrobial drug
most people associate the term chemotherapy with treatment for cancer .
however , chemotherapy be actually a broad term that refer to any use of chemical or drug to treat disease .
chemotherapy may involve drug that target cancerous cell or tissue , or - pron - may involve antimicrobial drug that target infectious microorganism .
antimicrobial drug typically work by destroy or interfere with microbial structure and enzyme , either kill microbial cell or inhibit of - pron - growth .
but before - pron - examine how these drug work , - pron - will briefly explore the history of human ' use of antimicrobial for the purpose of chemotherapy .
use of antimicrobials in ancient societies
although the discovery of antimicrobial and - pron - subsequent widespread use be commonly associate with modern medicine , there be evidence that human have be expose to antimicrobial compound for millennia .
chemical analysis of the skeletal remain of people from nubia[ two ] ( now find in present - day sudan ) date from between three  five  zero and five  five  zero ad have show residue of the antimicrobial agent tetracycline in high enough quantity to suggest the purposeful fermentation of tetracycline - produce streptomyce during the beer - make process .
the result beer , which be thick and gruel - like , be use to treat a variety of ailment in both adult and child , include gum disease and wound .
the antimicrobial property of certain plant may also have be recognize by various culture around the world , include indian and chinese herbalist ( figure one  four  .  two ) who have long use plant for a wide variety of medical purpose .
healer of many culture understand the antimicrobial property of fungi and - pron - use of moldy bread or other mold - contain product to treat wound have be well document for centuries . [ three ]
today , part one marisa , a five  two  - year - old woman , be suffer from severe abdominal pain , swollen lymph node , fatigue , and a fever .
- pron - have just return home from visit extended family in - pron - native country of cambodia .
while abroad , - pron - receive medical care in neighbor vietnam for a compress spinal cord .
- pron - still have discomfort when leave cambodia , but the pain increase as - pron - trip home continue and - pron - husband drive - pron - straight from the airport to the emergency room .
- pron - doctor consider whether marisa could be suffer from appendicitis , a urinary tract infection ( uti ) , or pelvic inflammatory disease ( pid ) .
however , each of those condition be typically precede or accompany by additional symptom .
- pron - consider the treatment - pron - receive in vietnam for - pron - compress spinal cord , but abdominal pain be not usually associate with spinal cord compression .
- pron - examine - pron - health history further .

what type of infection or other condition may be responsible ?

what type of lab test may the doctor order ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus two .
m . l . nelson et al .
“
brief communication  mass spectroscopic characterization of tetracycline in the skeletal remains of an ancient population from sudanese nubia
three  five  zero – five  five  zero ce .
"
american journal of physical anthropology one  four  three
no .
one
( two  zero  one  zero  )  one  five  one – one  five  four .
three .
m . wainwright .
" moulds in ancient and more recent medicine .
"
mycologist three
no .
one ( one  nine  eight  nine  )  two  one – two  three .
six  zero  eight chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five while about eight  zero % of the world 's population still rely on plant - derive medicines , [ four ] scientist be now discover the active compound confer the medicinal benefit contain in many of these traditionally use plant .
figure one  four  .  two for millennium , chinese herbalist have use many different specie of plant for the treatment of a wide variety of human ailment .

give example of how antimicrobial be use in ancient society .
the first antimicrobial drug societies rely on traditional medicine for thousand of year  however , the first half of the two  zero th century bring an era of strategic drug discovery .
in the early one  nine  zero  zero s , the german physician and scientist paul ehrlich ( one  eight  five  four – one  nine  one  five ) set out to discover or synthesize chemical compound capable of kill infectious microbe without harm the patient .
in one  nine  zero  nine , after screen more than six  zero  zero arsenic - contain compound , ehrlich 's assistant sahachiro hata ( one  eight  seven  three – one  nine  three  eight ) find one such “ magic bullet .
"
compound six  zero  six target the bacterium treponema pallidum , the causative agent of syphilis .
compound six  zero  six be find to successfully cure syphilis in rabbit and soon after be market under the name salvarsan as a remedy for the disease in human ( figure one  four  .  three ) .
ehrlich 's innovative approach of systematically screen a wide variety of compound remain a common strategy for the discovery of new antimicrobial agent even today .
four .
s . verma , s . p . singh .
“
current and future status of herbal medicines .
”
veterinary world one
no .
one  one
( two  zero  zero  eight  )  three  four  seven – three  five  zero .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  zero  nine figure one  four  .  three paul ehrlich be influential in the discovery of compound six  zero  six , an antimicrobial agent that prove to be an effective treatment for syphilis .
a few decade later , german scientist josef klarer , fritz mietzsch , and gerhard domagk discover the antibacterial activity of a synthetic dye , prontosil , that could treat streptococcal and staphylococcal infection in mouse .
domagk 's own daughter be one of the first human recipient of the drug , which completely cure - pron - of a severe streptococcal infection that have result from a poke with an embroidery needle .
gerhard domagk ( one  eight  nine  five – one  nine  six  four ) be award the nobel prize in medicine in one  nine  three  nine for - pron - work with prontosil and sulfanilamide , the active breakdown product of prontosil in the body .
sulfanilamide , the first synthetic antimicrobial create , serve as the foundation for the chemical development of a family of sulfa drug .
a synthetic antimicrobial be a drug that be develop from a chemical not find in nature .
the success of the sulfa drug lead to the discovery and production of additional important class of synthetic antimicrobial , include the quinoline and oxazolidinone .
a few year before the discovery of prontosil , scientist alexander fleming ( one  eight  eight  one – one  nine  five  five ) make - pron - own accidental discovery that turn out to be monumental .
in one  nine  two  eight , fleming return from holiday and examine some old plate of staphylococci in - pron - research laboratory at st . mary 's hospital in london .
- pron - observe that contaminate mold growth ( subsequently identify as a strain of penicillium notatum ) inhibit staphylococcal growth on one plate .
fleming , therefore , be credit with the discovery of penicillin , the first natural antibiotic , ( figure one  four  .  four ) .
further experimentation show that penicillin from the mold be antibacterial against streptococci , meningococci , and corynebacterium diphtheriae , the causative agent of diphtheria .
fleming and - pron - colleague be credit with discover and identify penicillin , but - pron - isolation and mass production be accomplish by a team of researcher at oxford university under the direction of howard florey ( one  eight  nine  eight – one  nine  six  eight ) and ernst chain ( one  nine  zero  six – one  nine  seven  nine )
( figure one  four  .  four ) .
in one  nine  four  zero , the research team purify penicillin and report - pron - success as an antimicrobial agent against streptococcal infection in mouse .
- pron - subsequent work with human subject also show penicillin to be very effective .
because of - pron - important work , fleming , florey , and chain be award the nobel prize in physiology and medicine in one  nine  four  five .
in the early one  nine  four  zero , scientist dorothy hodgkin ( one  nine  one  zero – one  nine  nine  four ) , who study crystallography at oxford university , use x - ray to analyze the structure of a variety of natural product .
in one  nine  four  six , - pron - determine the structure of penicillin , for which - pron - be award the nobel prize in chemistry in one  nine  six  four .
once the structure be understand , scientist could modify - pron - to produce a variety of semisynthetic penicillin .
a semisynthetic antimicrobial be a chemically modify derivative of a natural antibiotic .
the chemical modification be generally design to increase the range of bacteria six  one  zero chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five target , increase stability , decrease toxicity , or confer other property beneficial for treat infection .
penicillin be only one example of a natural antibiotic .
also in the one  nine  four  zero , selman waksman ( one  eight  eight  eight – one  nine  seven  three ) ( figure one  four  .  five ) , a prominent soil microbiologist at rutgers university , lead a research team that discover several antimicrobial , include actinomycin , streptomycin , and neomycin .
the discovery of these antimicrobial stem from waksman 's study of fungi and the actinobacteria , include soil bacteria in the genus streptomyces , know for - pron - natural production of a wide variety of antimicrobial .
- pron - work earn - pron - the nobel prize in physiology and medicine in one  nine  five  two .
the actinomycete be the source of more than half of all natural antibiotics[ five ] and continue to serve as an excellent reservoir for the discovery of novel antimicrobial agent .
some researcher argue that - pron - have not yet come close to tap the full antimicrobial potential of this group . [ six ] figure one  four  .  four
( a ) alexander fleming be the first to discover a naturally produce antimicrobial , penicillin , in one  nine  two  eight .
( b ) howard florey and ernst chain discover how to scale up penicillin production .
then - pron - figure out how to purify - pron - and show - pron - efficacy as an antimicrobial in animal and human trial in the early one  nine  four  zero .
five .
j . berdy .
"
bioactive microbial metabolites .
"
the journal of antibiotics five  eight
no .
one
( two  zero  zero  five  )  one – two  six .
six .
m . baltz .
“
antimicrobial from actinomycete 
back to the future .
” microbe two
no .
three
( two  zero  zero  seven  )  one  two  five – one  three  one .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  one  one figure one  four  .  five
selman waksman be the first to show the vast antimicrobial production capability of a group of soil bacteria , the actinomycete .

why be the soil a reservoir for antimicrobial resistance gene ?
one  four  .  two fundamentals of
antimicrobial chemotherapy learning objectives

contrast bacteriostatic versus bactericidal antibacterial activity
 contrast broad - spectrum drug versus narrow - spectrum drug

explain the significance of superinfection
 discuss the significance of dosage and the route of administration of a drug  identify factor and variable that can influence the side effect of a drug
 describe the significance of positive and negative interaction between drug
several factor be important in choose the most appropriate antimicrobial drug therapy , include bacteriostatic versus bactericidal mechanism , spectrum of activity , dosage and route of administration , the potential for side effect , and the potential interaction between drug .
the follow discussion will focus primarily on antibacterial drug , but the concept translate to other antimicrobial class .
bacteriostatic versus bactericidal antibacterial drug can be either bacteriostatic or bactericidal in - pron - interaction with target bacteria .
bacteriostatic drug cause a reversible inhibition of growth , with bacterial growth restart after elimination of the drug .
by contrast , bactericidal drug kill - pron - target bacteria .
the decision of whether to use a bacteriostatic or bactericidal six  one  two chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five drug depend on the type of infection and the immune status of the patient .
in a patient with strong immune defense , bacteriostatic and bactericidal drug can be effective in achieve clinical cure .
however , when a patient be immunocompromise , a bactericidal drug be essential for the successful treatment of infection .
regardless of the immune status of the patient , life - threaten infection such as acute endocarditis require the use of a bactericidal drug .
spectrum of activity
the spectrum of activity of an antibacterial drug relate to diversity of target bacteria .
a narrow - spectrum antimicrobial target only specific subset of bacterial pathogen .
for example , some narrow - spectrum drug only target gram - positive bacteria , whereas other target only gram - negative bacteria .
if the pathogen cause an infection have be identify , - pron - be good to use a narrow - spectrum antimicrobial and minimize collateral damage to the normal microbiota .
a broad - spectrum antimicrobial target a wide variety of bacterial pathogen , include both grampositive and gram - negative specie , and be frequently use as empiric therapy to cover a wide range of potential pathogen while wait on the laboratory identification of the infect pathogen .
broad - spectrum antimicrobial be also use for polymicrobic infection ( mixed infection with multiple bacterial specie ) , or as prophylactic prevention of infection with surgery / invasive procedure .
finally , broad - spectrum antimicrobial may be select to treat an infection when a narrow - spectrum drug fail because of development of drug resistance by the target pathogen .
the risk associate with use broad - spectrum antimicrobial be that - pron - will also target a broad spectrum of the normal microbiota , increase the risk of a superinfection , a secondary infection in a patient have a preexist infection .
a superinfection develop when the antibacterial intend for the preexist infection kill the protective microbiota , allow another pathogen resistant to the antibacterial to proliferate and cause a secondary infection ( figure one  four  .  six ) .
common example of superinfection that develop as a result of antimicrobial usage include yeast infection ( candidiasis ) and pseudomembranous colitis cause by clostridium difficile , which can be fatal .
figure one  four  .  six broad - spectrum antimicrobial use may lead to the development of a superinfection .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

what be a superinfection and how do one arise ?
dosage and route of administration
the amount of medication give during a certain time interval be the dosage , and - pron - must be determine carefully to ensure that optimum therapeutic drug level be achieve at the site of infection without cause significant toxicity ( side effect ) to the patient .
each drug class be associate with a variety of potential side effect , and some of these be describe for specific drug later in this chapter .
despite good effort to optimize dosing , allergic reaction and other potentially serious side effect do occur .
therefore , the goal be to select the optimum dosage that will minimize chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug six  one  three the risk of side effect while still achieve clinical cure , and there be important factor to consider when select the good dose and dosage interval .
for example , in child , dose be base upon the patient 's mass .
however , the same be not true for adult and child one  two year of age and old , for which there be typically a single standard dose regardless of the patient 's mass .
with the great variability in adult body mass , some expert have argue that mass should be consider for all patient when determine appropriate dosage . [ seven ]
an additional consideration be how drug be metabolize and eliminate from the body .
in general , patient with a history of liver or kidney dysfunction may experience reduce drug metabolism or clearance from the body , result in increase drug level that may lead to toxicity and make - pron - more prone to side effect .
there be also some factor specific to the drug - pron - that influence appropriate dose and time interval between dos .
for example , the half - life , or rate at which five  zero % of a drug be eliminate from the plasma , can vary significantly between drug .
some drug have a short half - life of only one hour and must be give multiple time a day , whereas other drug have half - life exceed one  two hour and can be give as a single dose every two  four hour .
although a long half - life can be consider an advantage for an antibacterial when - pron - come to convenient dosing interval , the long half - life can also be a concern for a drug that have serious side effect because drug level may remain toxic for a long time .
last , some drug be dose dependent , mean - pron - be more effective when administer in large dos to provide high level for a short time at the site of infection .
other be time dependent , mean - pron - be more effective when low optimum level be maintain over a long period of time .
the route of administration , the method use to introduce a drug into the body , be also an important consideration for drug therapy .
drug that can be administer orally be generally prefer because patient can more conveniently take these drug at home .
however , some drug be not absorb easily from the gastrointestinal ( gi ) tract into the bloodstream .
these drug be often useful for treat disease of the intestinal tract , such as tapeworm treat with niclosamide , or for decontaminate the bowel , as with colistin .
some drug that be not absorb easily , such as bacitracin , polymyxin , and several antifungal , be available as topical preparation for treatment of superficial skin infection .
sometimes , patient may not initially be able to take oral medication because of - pron - illness ( e . g . , vomiting , intubation for respirator ) .
when this occur , and when a choose drug be not absorb in the gi tract , administration of the drug by a parenteral route ( intravenous or intramuscular injection ) be prefer and typically be perform in health - care setting .
for most drug , the plasma level achieve by intravenous administration be substantially high than level achieve by oral or intramuscular administration , and this can also be an important consideration when choose the route of administration for treat an infection ( figure one  four  .  seven ) .
seven .
m . e . falagas , d . e . karageorgopoulos .
“
adjustment of dosing of antimicrobial agents for bodyweight in adults .
"
the lancet three  seven  five no .
nine  seven  one  zero ( two  zero  one  zero  )  two  four  eight – two  five  one .
six  one  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  four  .  seven
on this graph , t zero represent the time at which a drug dose be administer .
the curve illustrate how plasma concentration of the drug change over specific interval of time ( t one through t four ) .
as the graph show , when a drug be administer intravenously , the concentration peak very quickly and then gradually decrease .
when drug be administer orally or intramuscularly , - pron - take longer for the concentration to reach - pron - peak .

list five factor to consider when determine the dosage of a drug .

name some typical side effect associate with drug and identify some factor that may contribute to these side effect .
drug interactions
for the optimum treatment of some infection , two antibacterial drug may be administer together to provide a synergistic interaction that be well than the efficacy of either drug alone .
a classic example of synergistic combination be trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole ( bactrim ) .
individually , these two drug provide only bacteriostatic inhibition of bacterial growth , but combine , the drug be bactericidal .
whereas synergistic drug interaction provide a benefit to the patient , antagonistic interaction produce harmful effect .
antagonism can occur between two antimicrobial or between antimicrobial and nonantimicrobial be use to treat other condition .
the effect vary depend on the drug involve , but antagonistic interaction may cause loss of drug activity , decrease therapeutic level due to increase metabolism and elimination , or increase potential for toxicity due to decrease metabolism and elimination .
as an example , some antibacterial be absorb most effectively from the acidic environment of the stomach .
if a patient take antacid , however , this increase the ph of the stomach and negatively impact the absorption of these antimicrobial , decrease - pron - effectiveness in treat an infection .
study have also show an association between use of some antimicrobial and failure of oral contraceptives . [ eight ] eight .
b . d . dickinson et al .
“
drug interactions between oral contraceptives and antibiotics .
”
obstetrics and gynecology nine  eight , no .
five
( two  zero  zero  one  )  eight  five  three – eight  six  zero .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  one  five
 explain the difference between synergistic and antagonistic drug interaction .
resistance police
in the united states and many other country , most antimicrobial drug be self - administer by patient at home .
unfortunately , many patient stop take antimicrobial once - pron - symptom dissipate and - pron - feel well .
if a one  zero  - day course of treatment be prescribe , many patient only take the drug for five or six day , unaware of the negative consequence of not complete the full course of treatment .
a short course of treatment not only fail to kill the target organism to expect level , - pron - also select for drug - resistant variant within the target population and within the patient 's microbiota .
patient ' nonadherence especially amplify drug resistance when the recommend course of treatment be long .
treatment for tuberculosis ( tb ) be a case in point , with the recommend treatment last from six month to a year .
the cdc estimate that about one - third of the world 's population be infect with tb , most live in underdeveloped or underserved region where antimicrobial drug be available over the counter .
in such country , there may be even low rate of adherence than in develop area .
nonadherence lead to antibiotic resistance and more difficulty in control pathogen .
as a direct result , the emergence of multidrugresistant and extensively drug - resistant strain of tb be become a huge problem .
overprescription of antimicrobial also contribute to antibiotic resistance .
patient often demand antibiotic for disease that do not require - pron - , like viral cold and ear infection .
pharmaceutical company aggressively market drug to physician and clinic , make - pron - easy for - pron - to give free sample to patient , and some pharmacy even offer certain antibiotic free to low - income patient with a prescription .
in recent year , various initiative have aim to educate parent and clinician about the judicious use of antibiotic .
however , a recent study show that , between two  zero  zero  zero and two  zero  one  three , the parental expectation for antimicrobial prescription for child actually increase ( figure one  four  .  eight ) .
one possible solution be a regimen call directly observe therapy ( dot ) , which involve the supervised administration of medication to patient .
patient be either require to visit a health - care facility to receive - pron - medication , or health - care provider must administer medication in patient ' home or another designate location .
dot have be implement in many case for the treatment of tb and have be show to be effective  indeed , dot be an integral part of who 's global strategy for eradicate tb . [ nine ] , [ one  zero ]
but be this a practical strategy for all antibiotic ?
would patient take penicillin , for example , be more or less likely to adhere to the full course of treatment if - pron - have to travel to a health - care facility for each dose ?
and who would pay for the increase cost associate with dot ?
when - pron - come to overprescription , should someone be police physician or drug company to enforce good practice ?
what group should assume this responsibility , and what penalty would be effective in discourage overprescription ?
eye on ethics nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
tuberculosis ( tb ) .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / tb / education / ssmodules / module nine  / ss nine reading two  . htm .
accessed june two , two  zero  one  six .
one  zero .
world health organization .
“
tuberculosis ( tb ) 
the five element of dots .
"
http / / www . who . int / tb / dot / whatisdot
/ en / . accessed june two , two  zero  one  six .
six  one  six chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  four  .  eight
this graph indicate trend in parental expectation relate to prescription of antibiotic base on a recent study . [ one  one ]
among parent of medicaid - insure child , there be a clear upward trend in parental expectation for prescription antibiotic .
expectation be relatively stable ( and less ) among parent whose child be commercially insure , suggest that these parent be somewhat better informed than those with medicaid - insure child .
one  four  .  three mechanisms of antibacterial drugs learning objective

describe the mechanism of action associate with drug that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis , protein synthesis , membrane function , nucleic acid synthesis , and metabolic pathway
an important quality for an antimicrobial drug be selective toxicity , mean that - pron - selectively kill or inhibit the growth of microbial target while cause minimal or no harm to the host .
most antimicrobial drug currently in clinical use be antibacterial because the prokaryotic cell provide a great variety of unique target for selective toxicity , in comparison to fungi , parasite , and virus .
each class of antibacterial drug have a unique mode of action ( the way in which a drug affect microbe at the cellular level ) , and these be summarize in figure one  four  .  nine and table one  four  .  one .
one  one .
vaz , l . e . , et al .
“
prevalence of parental misconceptions about antibiotic use .
"
pediatrics one  three  six no .  two ( august two  zero  one  five ) .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  five  four  two  / peds .  two  zero  one  five - zero  eight  eight  three .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
six  one  seven figure one  four  .  nine there be several class of antibacterial compound that be typically classify base on - pron - bacterial target .
common antibacterial drugs by mode of action mode of action
target drug class penicillin - bind protein β - lactam  penicillin , cephalosporin , monobactam , carbapenem peptidoglycan subunit glycopeptides inhibit cell wall biosynthesis peptidoglycan subunit transport bacitracin inhibit biosynthesis of protein three  zero s ribosomal subunit aminoglycosides , tetracycline five  zero s ribosomal subunit macrolides , lincosamide , chloramphenicol , oxazolidinone disrupt membrane lipopolysaccharide , inner and outer membrane polymyxin b , colistin , daptomycin rna rifamycin inhibit nucleic acid synthesis dna fluoroquinolones
folic acid synthesis enzyme sulfonamides , trimethoprim antimetabolites mycolic acid synthesis enzyme isonicotinic acid hydrazide mycobacterial adenosine triphosphate ( atp )
synthase inhibitor mycobacterial atp synthase diarylquinoline table one  four  .  one six  one  eight chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five inhibitors of cell
wall biosynthesis several different class of antibacterial block step in the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan , make cell more susceptible to osmotic lysis ( table one  four  .  two ) .
therefore , antibacterial that target cell wall biosynthesis be bactericidal in - pron - action .
because human cell do not make peptidoglycan , this mode of action be an excellent example of selective toxicity .
penicillin , the first antibiotic discover , be one of several antibacterial within a class call β - lactam .
this group of compound include the penicillin , cephalosporin , monobactam , and carbapenem , and be characterize by the presence of a β - lactam ring find within the central structure of the drug molecule ( figure one  four  .  one  zero ) .
the β - lactam antibacterial block the crosslinking of peptide chain during the biosynthesis of new peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall .
- pron - be able to block this process because the β - lactam structure be similar to the structure of the peptidoglycan subunit component that be recognize by the crosslinking transpeptidase enzyme , also know as a penicillin - bind protein ( pbp ) .
although the β - lactam ring must remain unchanged for these drug to retain - pron - antibacterial activity , strategic chemical change to the r group have allow for development of a wide variety of semisynthetic β - lactam drug with increase potency , expand spectrum of activity , and longer half - life for well dosing , among other characteristic .
penicillin g and penicillin v be natural antibiotic from fungi and be primarily active against gram - positive bacterial pathogen , and a few gram - negative bacterial pathogen such as pasteurella multocida .
figure one  four  .  one  zero summarize the semisynthetic development of some of the penicillin .
add an amino group ( - nh two ) to penicillin g create the aminopenicillin ( i . e . , ampicillin and amoxicillin ) that have increase spectrum of activity against more gramnegative pathogen .
furthermore , the addition of a hydroxyl group ( - oh ) to amoxicillin increase acid stability , which allow for improve oral absorption .
methicillin be a semisynthetic penicillin that be develop to address the spread of enzyme ( penicillinase ) that be inactivate the other penicillin .
change the r group of penicillin g to the more bulky dimethoxyphenyl group provide protection of the β - lactam ring from enzymatic destruction by penicillinase , give - pron - the first penicillinase - resistant penicillin .
similar to the penicillin , cephalosporin contain a β - lactam ring ( figure one  four  .  one  zero ) and block the transpeptidase activity of penicillin - bind protein .
however , the β - lactam ring of cephalosporin be fuse to a six - member ring , rather than the five - member ring find in penicillin .
this chemical difference provide cephalosporin with an increase resistance to enzymatic inactivation by β - lactamase .
the drug cephalosporin c be originally isolate from the fungus cephalosporium acremonium in the one  nine  five  zero and have a similar spectrum of activity to that of penicillin against gram - positive bacteria but be active against more gram - negative bacteria than penicillin .
another important structural difference be that cephalosporin c possess two r group , compare with just one r group for penicillin , and this provide for great diversity in chemical alteration and development of semisynthetic cephalosporin .
the family of semisynthetic cephalosporin be much large than the penicillin , and these drug have be classify into generation base primarily on - pron - spectrum of activity , increase in spectrum from the narrow - spectrum , first - generation cephalosporin to the broad - spectrum , fourth - generation cephalosporin .
a new fifth - generation cephalosporin have be develop that be active against methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ) .
the carbapenem and monobactam also have a β - lactam ring as part of - pron - core structure , and - pron - inhibit the transpeptidase activity of penicillin - bind protein .
the only monobactam use clinically be aztreonam .
- pron - be a narrow - spectrum antibacterial with activity only against gram - negative bacteria .
in contrast , the carbapenem family include a variety of semisynthetic drug ( imipenem , meropenem , and doripenem ) that provide very broad - spectrum activity against gram - positive and gram - negative bacterial pathogen .
the drug vancomycin , a member of a class of compound call the glycopeptide , be discover in the one  nine  five  zero s as a natural antibiotic from the actinomycete amycolatopsis orientalis .
similar to the β - lactam , vancomycin inhibit cell wall biosynthesis and be bactericidal .
however , in contrast to the β - lactam , the structure of vancomycin be not similar to that of cell - wall peptidoglycan subunit and do not directly inactivate penicillin - bind protein .
rather , vancomycin be a very large , complex molecule that bind to the end of the peptide chain of cell wall precursor , create a structural blockage that prevent the cell wall subunit from be incorporate into the grow n - acetylglucosamine and n - acetylmuramic acid ( nam - nag ) backbone of the peptidoglycan structure ( transglycosylation ) .
vancomycin also structurally block transpeptidation .
vancomycin be bactericidal against gram - chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  one  nine positive bacterial pathogen , but - pron - be not active against gram - negative bacteria because of - pron - inability to penetrate the protective outer membrane .
the drug bacitracin consist of a group of structurally similar peptide antibiotic originally isolate from bacillus subtili .
bacitracin block the activity of a specific cell - membrane molecule that be responsible for the movement of peptidoglycan precursor from the cytoplasm to the exterior of the cell , ultimately prevent - pron - incorporation into the cell wall .
bacitracin be effective against a wide range of bacteria , include gram - positive organism find on the skin , such as staphylococcus and streptococcus .
although - pron - may be administer orally or intramuscularly in some circumstance , bacitracin have be show to be nephrotoxic ( damage to the kidney ) .
therefore , - pron - be more commonly combine with neomycin and polymyxin in topical ointment such as neosporin .
figure one  four  .  one  zero penicillins , cephalosporin , monobactam , and carbapenem all contain a β - lactam ring , the site of attack by inactivate β - lactamase enzyme .
although - pron - all share the same nucleus , various penicillin differ from each other in the structure of - pron - r group .
chemical change to the r group provide increase spectrum of activity , acid stability , and resistance to β - lactamase degradation .
drug that inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis mechanism of action drug class specific drugs natural or semisynthetic spectrum of activity interact directly with pbp and inhibit transpeptidase activity penicillins penicillin g , penicillin v natural narrow - spectrum against gram - positive and a few gram - negative bacteria table one  four  .  two
six  two  zero chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five drug that inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis mechanism of action drug class specific drugs natural or semisynthetic spectrum of activity ampicillin , amoxicillin semisynthetic narrow - spectrum against gram - positive bacteria but with increase gramnegative spectrum methicillin semisynthetic narrow - spectrum against gram - positive bacteria only , include strain produce penicillinase cephalosporin c natural narrow - spectrum similar to penicillin but with increase gram - negative spectrum firstgeneration cephalosporin semisynthetic narrow - spectrum similar to cephalosporin c secondgeneration cephalosporin semisynthetic narrow - spectrum
but with increase gram - negative spectrum compare with first generation third - and
fourthgeneration cephalosporin semisynthetic broad - spectrum against gram - positive and gramnegative bacteria , include some β - lactamase producer cephalosporins fifthgeneration
cephalosporin semisynthetic broad - spectrum against gram - positive and gramnegative bacteria , include mrsa monobactam aztreonam semisynthetic narrow - spectrum against gram - negative bacteria , include some β - lactamase producer carbapenems imipenem , meropenem , doripenem semisynthetic broadest spectrum of the β - lactam against grampositive and gramnegative bacteria , include many β - lactamase producer large molecule that bind to the peptide chain of peptidoglycan subunit , block transglycosylation and transpeptidation glycopeptides vancomycin natural narrow spectrum against gram - positive bacteria only , include multidrugresistant strain table one  four  .  two chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  two  one drug that inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis mechanism of action drug class specific drugs natural or semisynthetic spectrum of activity block transport of peptidoglycan subunit across cytoplasmic membrane bacitracin bacitracin natural broad - spectrum against gram - positive and gramnegative bacteria table one  four  .  two

describe the mode of action of β - lactam .
inhibitor of protein biosynthesis
the cytoplasmic ribosome find in animal cell ( eight  zero s ) be structurally distinct from those find in bacterial cell ( seven  zero s ) , make protein biosynthesis a good selective target for antibacterial drug .
several type of protein biosynthesis inhibitor be discuss in this section and be summarize in figure one  four  .  one  one .
protein synthesis inhibitors
that bind the three  zero s subunit aminoglycosides be large , highly polar antibacterial drug that bind to the three  zero s subunit of bacterial ribosome , impair the proofread ability of the ribosomal complex .
this impairment cause mismatch between codon and anticodon , result in the production of protein with incorrect amino acid and shorten protein that insert into the cytoplasmic membrane .
disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by the faulty protein kill the bacterial cell .
the aminoglycoside , which include drug such as streptomycin , gentamicin , neomycin , and kanamycin , be potent broad - spectrum antibacterial .
however , aminoglycoside have be show to be nephrotoxic ( damage to kidney ) , neurotoxic ( damage to the nervous system ) , and ototoxic ( damage to the ear ) .
another class of antibacterial compound that bind to the three  zero s subunit be the tetracycline .
in contrast to aminoglycoside , these drug be bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis by block the association of trnas with the ribosome during translation .
naturally occur tetracycline produce by various strain of streptomyce be first discover in the one  nine  four  zero , and several semisynthetic tetracycline , include doxycycline and tigecycline have also be produce .
although the tetracycline be broad spectrum in - pron - coverage of bacterial pathogen , side effect that can limit - pron - use include phototoxicity , permanent discoloration of develop tooth , and liver toxicity with high dos or in patient with kidney impairment .
protein synthesis inhibitors
that bind the five  zero s subunit
there be several class of antibacterial drug that work through bind to the five  zero s subunit of bacterial ribosome .
the macrolide antibacterial drug have a large , complex ring structure and be part of a large class of naturally produce secondary metabolite call polyketide , complex compound produce in a stepwise fashion through the repeat addition of two - carbon unit by a mechanism similar to that use for fatty acid synthesis .
macrolide be broad - spectrum , bacteriostatic drug that block elongation of protein by inhibit peptide bond formation between specific combination of amino acid .
the first macrolide be erythromycin .
- pron - be isolate in one  nine  five  two from streptomyces erythreus and prevent translocation .
semisynthetic macrolide include azithromycin and telithromycin .
compare with erythromycin , azithromycin have a broad spectrum of activity , few side effect , and a significantly long half - life ( one  .  five hour for erythromycin versus six  eight hour for azithromycin ) that allow for once - daily dosing and a short three  - day course of therapy ( i . e . , zpac formulation ) for most infection .
telithromycin be the first semisynthetic six  two  two chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five within the class know as ketolide .
although telithromycin show increased potency and activity against macrolideresistant pathogen , the us food and drug administration ( fda ) have limit - pron - use to treatment of communityacquire pneumonia and require the strong " black box warn " label for the drug because of serious hepatotoxicity .
the lincosamide include the naturally produce lincomycin and semisynthetic clindamycin .
although structurally distinct from macrolide , lincosamide be similar in - pron - mode of action to the macrolide through bind to the five  zero s ribosomal subunit and prevent peptide bond formation .
lincosamide be particularly active against streptococcal and staphylococcal infection .
the drug chloramphenicol represent yet another structurally distinct class of antibacterial that also bind to the five  zero s ribosome , inhibit peptide bond formation .
chloramphenicol , produce by streptomyces venezuelae , be discover in one  nine  four  seven  in one  nine  four  nine , - pron - become the first broad - spectrum antibiotic that be approve by the fda .
although - pron - be a natural antibiotic , - pron - be also easily synthesize and be the first antibacterial drug synthetically mass produce .
as a result of - pron - mass production , broad - spectrum coverage , and ability to penetrate into tissue efficiently , chloramphenicol be historically use to treat a wide range of infection , from meningitis to typhoid fever to conjunctivitis .
unfortunately , serious side effect , such as lethal gray baby syndrome , and suppression of bone marrow production , have limit - pron - clinical role .
chloramphenicol also cause anemia in two different way .
one mechanism involve the targeting of mitochondrial ribosome within hematopoietic stem cell , cause a reversible , dose - dependent suppression of blood cell production .
once chloramphenicol dosing be discontinue , blood cell production return to normal .
this mechanism highlight the similarity between seven  zero s ribosome of bacteria and the seven  zero s ribosome within - pron - mitochondria .
the second mechanism of anemia be idiosyncratic ( i . e . , the mechanism be not understand ) , and involve an irreversible lethal loss of blood cell production know as aplastic anemia .
this mechanism of aplastic anemia be not dose dependent and can develop after therapy have stop .
because of toxicity concern , chloramphenicol usage in human be now rare in the united states and be limit to severe infection unable to be treat by less toxic antibiotic .
because - pron - side effect be much less severe in animal , - pron - be use in veterinary medicine .
the oxazolidinone , include linezolid , be a new broad - spectrum class of synthetic protein synthesis inhibitor that bind to the five  zero s ribosomal subunit of both gram - positive and gram - negative bacteria .
however , - pron - mechanism of action seem somewhat different from that of the other five  zero s subunit - bind protein synthesis inhibitor already discuss .
instead , - pron - seem to interfere with formation of the initiation complex ( association of the five  zero s subunit , three  zero s subunit , and other factor ) for translation , and - pron - prevent translocation of the grow protein from the ribosomal a site to the p site .
table one  four  .  three summarize the protein synthesis inhibitor .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
six  two  three figure one  four  .  one  one
the major class of protein synthesis inhibitor target the three  zero s or five  zero s subunit of cytoplasmic ribosome .
drug that inhibit bacterial protein synthesis molecular
target mechanism of action drug class specific drugs bacteriostatic or bactericidal spectrum of activity causes mismatch between codon and anticodon , lead to faulty protein that insert into and disrupt cytoplasmic membrane aminoglycosides streptomycin , gentamicin , neomycin , kanamycin bactericidal broad spectrum three  zero s subunit blocks association of trnas with ribosome tetracyclines tetracycline , doxycycline , tigecycline bacteriostatic broad spectrum macrolides erythromycin , azithromycin , telithromycin bacteriostatic broad spectrum lincosamides lincomycin , clindamycin bacteriostatic narrow spectrum blocks peptide bond formation between amino acid not applicable chloramphenicol bacteriostatic broad spectrum five  zero s subunit interferes with the formation of the initiation complex between five  zero s and three  zero s subunit and other factor .
oxazolidinones linezolid bacteriostatic broad spectrum table one  four  .  three six  two  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  compare and contrast the different type of protein synthesis inhibitor .
inhibitor of membrane function a small group of antibacterial target the bacterial membrane as - pron - mode of action ( table one  four  .  four ) .
the polymyxin be natural polypeptide antibiotic that be first discover in one  nine  four  seven as product of bacillus polymyxa  only polymyxin b and polymyxin e ( colistin ) have be use clinically .
- pron - be lipophilic with detergent - like property and interact with the lipopolysaccharide component of the outer membrane of gram - negative bacteria , ultimately disrupt both - pron - outer and inner membrane and kill the bacterial cell .
unfortunately , the membrane - target mechanism be not a selective toxicity , and these drug also target and damage the membrane of cell in the kidney and nervous system when administer systemically .
because of these serious side effect and - pron - poor absorption from the digestive tract , polymyxin b be use in over - the - counter topical antibiotic ointment ( e . g . , neosporin ) , and oral colistin be historically use only for bowel decontamination to prevent infection originate from bowel microbe in immunocompromised patient or for those undergo certain abdominal surgery .
however , the emergence and spread of multidrug - resistant pathogen have lead to increase use of intravenous colistin in hospital , often as a drug of last resort to treat serious infection .
the antibacterial daptomycin be a cyclic lipopeptide produce by streptomyce roseosporus that seem to work like the polymyxin , insert in the bacterial cell membrane and disrupt - pron - .
however , in contrast to polymyxin b and colistin , which target only gram - negative bacteria , daptomycin specifically target gram - positive bacteria .
- pron - be typically administer intravenously and seem to be well tolerate , show reversible toxicity in skeletal muscle .
drug that inhibit bacterial membrane function mechanism of
action drug class specific drugs spectrum of activity
clinical use polymyxin b narrow spectrum against gramnegative bacteria , include multidrugresistant strain topical preparation to prevent infection in wound
oral dosing to decontaminate bowel to prevent infection in immunocompromised patient or patient undergo invasive surgery / procedure .
interact with lipopolysaccharide in the outer membrane of gramnegative bacteria , kill the cell through the eventual disruption of the outer membrane and cytoplasmic membrane polymyxins polymyxin e
( colistin )
narrow spectrum against gramnegative bacteria , include multidrugresistant strain intravenous dose to treat serious systemic infection cause by multidrug - resistant pathogen table one  four  .  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  two  five drug that inhibit bacterial membrane function mechanism of action drug class specific drugs spectrum of activity
clinical use inserts into the cytoplasmic membrane of gram - positive bacteria , disrupt the membrane and kill the cell lipopeptide daptomycin narrow spectrum against grampositive bacteria , include multidrugresistant strain complicated skin and skin - structure infection and bacteremia cause by gram - positive pathogen , include mrsa table one  four  .  four

how do polymyxin inhibit membrane function ?
inhibitors of nucleic acid synthesis
some antibacterial drug work by inhibit nucleic acid synthesis ( table one  four  .  five ) .
for example , metronidazole be a semisynthetic member of the nitroimidazole family that be also an antiprotozoan .
- pron - interfere with dna replication in target cell .
the drug rifampin be a semisynthetic member of the rifamycin family and function by block rna polymerase activity in bacteria .
the rna polymerase enzyme in bacteria be structurally different from those in eukaryote , provide for selective toxicity against bacterial cell .
- pron - be use for the treatment of a variety of infection , but - pron - primary use , often in a cocktail with other antibacterial drug , be against mycobacteria that cause tuberculosis .
despite the selectivity of - pron - mechanism , rifampin can induce liver enzyme to increase metabolism of other drug be administer ( antagonism ) , lead to hepatotoxicity ( liver toxicity ) and negatively influence the bioavailability and therapeutic effect of the companion drug .
one member of the quinolone family , a group of synthetic antimicrobial , be nalidixic acid .
- pron - be discover in one  nine  six  two as a byproduct during the synthesis of chloroquine , an antimalarial drug .
nalidixic acid selectively inhibit the activity of bacterial dna gyrase , block dna replication .
chemical modification to the original quinolone backbone have result in the production of fluoroquinolone , like ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin , which also inhibit the activity of dna gyrase .
ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin be effective against a broad spectrum of gram - positive or gram - negative bacteria , and be among the most commonly prescribe antibiotic use to treat a wide range of infection , include urinary tract infection , respiratory infection , abdominal infection , and skin infection .
however , despite - pron - selective toxicity against dna gyrase , side effect associate with different fluoroquinolone include phototoxicity , neurotoxicity , cardiotoxicity , glucose metabolism dysfunction , and increase risk for tendon rupture .
six  two  six chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five drug that inhibit bacterial nucleic acid synthesis mechanisms of action drug class specific drugs spectrum of activity
clinical use inhibits bacterial rna polymerase activity and block transcription , kill the cell rifamycin rifampin narrow spectrum with activity against gram - positive and limited number of gram - negative bacteria .
also active against mycobacterium tuberculosis .
combination therapy for treatment of tuberculosis inhibit the activity of dna gyrase and block dna replication , kill the cell fluoroquinolones ciprofloxacin , ofloxacin , moxifloxacin broad spectrum against grampositive and gram - negative bacteria
wide variety of skin and systemic infection
table one  four  .  five

why do inhibitor of bacterial nucleic acid synthesis not target host cell ?
inhibitors of metabolic pathways
some synthetic drug control bacterial infection by function as antimetabolite , competitive inhibitor for bacterial metabolic enzyme ( table one  four  .  six ) .
the sulfonamide ( sulfa drug ) be the old synthetic antibacterial agent and be structural analogue of para - aminobenzoic acid ( paba ) , an early intermediate in folic acid synthesis ( figure one  four  .  one  two ) .
by inhibit the enzyme involve in the production of dihydrofolic acid , sulfonamide block bacterial biosynthesis of folic acid and , subsequently , pyrimidine and purine require for nucleic acid synthesis .
this mechanism of action provide bacteriostatic inhibition of growth against a wide spectrum of gram - positive and gram - negative pathogen .
because human obtain folic acid from food instead of synthesize - pron - intracellularly , sulfonamide be selectively toxic for bacteria .
however , allergic reaction to sulfa drug be common .
the sulfone be structurally similar to sulfonamide but be not commonly use today except for the treatment of hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) .
trimethoprim be a synthetic antimicrobial compound that serve as an antimetabolite within the same folic acid synthesis pathway as sulfonamide .
however , trimethoprim be a structural analogue of dihydrofolic acid and inhibit a later step in the metabolic pathway
( figure one  four  .  one  two ) .
trimethoprim be use in combination with the sulfa drug sulfamethoxazole to treat urinary tract infection , ear infection , and bronchitis .
as discuss , the combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole be an example of antibacterial synergy .
when use alone , each antimetabolite only decrease production of folic acid to a level where bacteriostatic inhibition of growth occur .
however , when use in combination , inhibition of both step in the metabolic pathway decrease folic acid synthesis to a level that be lethal to the bacterial cell .
because of the importance of folic acid during fetal development , sulfa drug and trimethoprim use should be carefully consider during early pregnancy .
the drug isoniazid be an antimetabolite with specific toxicity for mycobacteria and have long be use in combination with rifampin or streptomycin in the treatment of tuberculosis .
- pron - be administer as a prodrug , require activation through the action of an intracellular bacterial peroxidase enzyme , form isoniazid - nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( nad ) and isoniazid - nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate ( nadp ) , ultimately prevent the synthesis of mycolic acid , which be essential for mycobacterial cell wall .
possible side effect of isoniazid use include hepatotoxicity , neurotoxicity , and hematologic toxicity ( anemia ) .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
six  two  seven figure one  four  .  one  two sulfonamides and trimethoprim be example of antimetabolite that interfere in the bacterial synthesis of folic acid by block purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis , thus inhibit bacterial growth .
antimetabolite drugs metabolic pathway target mechanism of
action drug class specific drugs spectrum of activity inhibit
the enzyme sulfonamides sulfamethoxazole involve in production of dihydrofolic acid sulfones dapsone broad spectrum against gram - positive and gramnegative bacteria folic acid synthesis inhibit the enzyme involve in the production of tetrahydrofolic acid not applicable trimethoprim broad spectrum against gram - positive and gramnegative bacteria table one  four  .  six six  two  eight chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five antimetabolite drugs metabolic pathway target mechanism of action drug class specific drugs
spectrum of activity mycolic acid synthesis interferes with the synthesis of mycolic acid not applicable isoniazid narrow spectrum against mycobacterium spp . , include m . tuberculosis table one  four  .  six
 how do sulfonamide and trimethoprim selectively target bacteria ?
inhibitor of atp synthase bedaquiline , represent the synthetic antibacterial class of compound call the diarylquinoline , use a novel mode of action that specifically inhibit mycobacterial growth .
although the specific mechanism have yet to be elucidate , this compound appear to interfere with the function of atp synthase , perhaps by interfere with the use of the hydrogen ion gradient for atp synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation , lead to reduce atp production .
due to - pron - side effect , include hepatotoxicity and potentially lethal heart arrhythmia , - pron - use be reserve for serious , otherwise untreatable case of tuberculosis .
to learn more about the general principle of antimicrobial therapy and bacterial mode of action , visit michigan state university 's antimicrobial resistance learning site ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two msuantireslea ) , particularly page six through nine .
part two read thorough marisa 's health history , the doctor notice that during - pron - hospitalization in vietnam , - pron - be catheterize and receive the antimicrobial drug ceftazidime and metronidazole .
upon learn this , the doctor order a ct scan of marisa 's abdomen to rule out appendicitis  the doctor also request blood work to see if - pron - have an elevated white blood cell count , and order a urine analysis test and urine culture to look for the presence of white blood cell , red blood cell , and bacteria .
marisa 's urine sample come back positive for the presence of bacteria , indicate a urinary tract infection ( uti ) .
the doctor prescribe ciprofloxacin .
in the meantime , - pron - urine be culture to grow the bacterium for further testing .

what type of antimicrobial be typically prescribe for uti ?

base upon the antimicrobial drug - pron - be give in vietnam , which of the antimicrobial for treatment link to learn clinical focus chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  two  nine of a uti
would - pron - predict to be ineffective ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  four  .  four mechanisms of other antimicrobial drug learning objective

explain the difference between mode of action of drug that target fungus , protozoa , helminth , and virus because fungi , protozoa , and helminth be eukaryotic , - pron - cell be very similar to human cell , make - pron - more difficult to develop drug with selective toxicity .
additionally , virus replicate within human host cell , make - pron - difficult to develop drug that be selectively toxic to virus or virus - infect cell .
despite these challenge , there be antimicrobial drug that target fungus , protozoa , helminth , and virus , and some even target more than one type of microbe .
table one  four  .  seven , table one  four  .  eight , table one  four  .  nine , and table one  four  .  one  zero provide example for antimicrobial drug in these various class .
antifungal drug
the most common mode of action for antifungal drug be the disruption of the cell membrane .
antifungal take advantage of small difference between fungi and human in the biochemical pathway that synthesize sterol .
the sterol be important in maintain proper membrane fluidity and , hence , proper function of the cell membrane .
for most fungi , the predominant membrane sterol be ergosterol .
because human cell membrane use cholesterol , instead of ergosterol , antifungal drug that target ergosterol synthesis be selectively toxic ( figure one  four  .  one  three ) .
figure one  four  .  one  three
the predominant sterol find in human cell be cholesterol , whereas the predominant sterol find in fungi be ergosterol , make ergosterol a good target for antifungal drug development .
the imidazole be synthetic fungicide that disrupt ergosterol biosynthesis  - pron - be commonly use in medical application and also in agriculture to keep seed and harvest crop from mold .
example include miconazole , ketoconazole , and clotrimazole , which be use to treat fungal skin infection such as ringworm , specifically tinea pedis ( athlete 's foot ) , tinea cruris ( jock itch ) , and tinea corporis .
these infection be commonly cause by dermatophyte of the genera trichophyton , epidermophyton , and microsporum .
miconazole be also use predominantly for the treatment of vaginal yeast infection cause by the fungus candida , and ketoconazole be use for the treatment of tinea versicolor and dandruff , which both can be cause by the fungus malassezia .
the triazole drug , include fluconazole , also inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis .
however , - pron - can be administer orally or intravenously for the treatment of several type of systemic yeast infection , include oral thrush and cryptococcal meningitis , both of which be prevalent in patient with aids .
the triazole also exhibit more selective six  three  zero chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five toxicity , compare with the imidazole , and be associate with few side effect .
the allylamine , a structurally different class of synthetic antifungal drug , inhibit an early step in ergosterol biosynthesis .
the most commonly use allylamine be terbinafine ( market under the brand name lamisil ) , which be use topically for the treatment of dermatophytic skin infection like athlete 's foot , ringworm , and jock itch .
oral treatment with terbinafine be also use for the treatment of fingernail and toenail fungus , but - pron - can be associate with the rare side effect of hepatotoxicity .
the polyene be a class of antifungal agent naturally produce by certain actinomycete soil bacteria and be structurally relate to macrolide .
these large , lipophilic molecule bind to ergosterol in fungal cytoplasmic membrane , thus create pore .
common example include nystatin and amphotericin b . nystatin be typically use as a topical treatment for yeast infection of the skin , mouth , and vagina , but may also be use for intestinal fungal infection .
the drug amphotericin b be use for systemic fungal infection like aspergillosis , cryptococcal meningitis , histoplasmosis , blastomycosis , and candidiasis .
amphotericin b be the only antifungal drug available for several decade , but - pron - use be associate with some serious side effect , include nephrotoxicity ( kidney toxicity ) .
amphotericin b be often use in combination with flucytosine , a fluorinated pyrimidine analog that be convert by a fungal - specific enzyme into a toxic product that interfere with both dna replication and protein synthesis in fungi .
flucytosine be also associate with hepatotoxicity ( liver toxicity ) and bone marrow depression .
beyond target ergosterol in fungal cell membrane , there be a few antifungal drug that target other fungal structure ( figure one  four  .  one  four ) .
the echinocandin , include caspofungin , be a group of naturally produce antifungal compound that block the synthesis of β (  one → three ) glucan find in fungal cell wall but not find in human cell .
this drug class have the nickname " penicillin for fungi .
"
caspofungin be use for the treatment of aspergillosis as well as systemic yeast infection .
although chitin be only a minor constituent of fungal cell wall , - pron - be also absent in human cell , make - pron - a selective target .
the polyoxin and nikkomycin be naturally produce antifungal that target chitin synthesis .
polyoxin be use to control fungi for agricultural purpose , and nikkomycin z be currently under development for use in human to treat yeast infection and valley fever ( coccidioidomycosis ) , a fungal disease prevalent in the southwestern us . [ one  two ]
the naturally produce antifungal griseofulvin be think to specifically disrupt fungal cell division by interfere with microtubule involve in spindle formation during mitosis .
- pron - be one of the first antifungal , but - pron - use be associate with hepatotoxicity .
- pron - be typically administer orally to treat various type of dermatophytic skin infection when other topical antifungal treatment be ineffective .
there be a few drug that act as antimetabolite against fungal process .
for example , atovaquone , a representative of the naphthoquinone drug class , be a semisynthetic antimetabolite for fungal and protozoal version of a mitochondrial cytochrome important in electron transport .
structurally , - pron - be an analog of coenzyme q , with which - pron - compete for electron binding .
- pron - be particularly useful for the treatment of pneumocystis pneumonia cause by pneumocystis jirovecii .
the antibacterial sulfamethoxazole - trimethoprim combination also act as an antimetabolite against p . jirovecii .
table one  four  .  seven show the various therapeutic class of antifungal drug , categorize by mode of action , with example of each .
one  two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ valley fever 
awareness be key .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / feature / valleyfever / . accessed june one , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  three  one figure one  four  .  one  four antifungal drug target several different cell structure .
( credit right 
modification of work by “ maya and rike” / wikimedia commons )
common antifungal drugs mechanism of action drug class specific drugs
clinical uses imidazoles miconazole , ketoconazole , clotrimazole fungal skin infection and vaginal yeast infection triazole fluconazole systemic yeast infection , oral thrush , and cryptococcal meningitis inhibit ergosterol synthesis allylamines terbinafine dermatophytic skin infection ( athlete 's foot , ring worm , jock itch ) , and infection of fingernail and toenail
nystatin used topically for yeast infection of skin , mouth , and vagina  also use for fungal infection of the intestine bind ergosterol in the cell membrane and create pore that disrupt the membrane polyenes amphotericin b variety systemic fungal infection echinocandin caspofungin aspergillosis and systemic yeast infection inhibit cell wall synthesis not applicable nikkomycin z coccidioidomycosis ( valley fever ) and yeast infection inhibit microtubule and cell division
not applicable griseofulvin dermatophytic skin infection table one  four  .  seven six  three  two chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
how be disruption of ergosterol biosynthesis an effective mode of action for antifungal ?
treat a fungal infection of the lungs jack , a four  eight  - year - old engineer , be hiv positive but generally healthy thank to antiretroviral therapy ( art ) .
however , after a particularly intense week at work , - pron - develop a fever and a dry cough .
- pron - assume that - pron - just have a cold or mild flu due to overexertion and do not think much of - pron - .
however , after about a week , - pron - begin to experience fatigue , weight loss , and shortness of breath .
- pron - decide to visit - pron - physician , who find that jack have a low level of blood oxygenation .
the physician order blood testing , a chest xray , and the collection of an induce sputum sample for analysis .
- pron - x - ray show a fine cloudiness and several pneumatocele ( thin - walled pocket of air ) , which indicate pneumocystis pneumonia ( pcp ) , a type of pneumonia cause by the fungus pneumocystis jirovecii .
jack 's physician admit - pron - to the hospital and prescribe bactrim , a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim , to be administer intravenously .
p . jirovecii be a yeast - like fungus with a life cycle similar to that of protozoan .
as such , - pron - be classify as a protozoan until the one  nine  eight  zero s .
- pron - live only in the lung tissue of infected person and be transmit from person to person , with many people expose as child .
typically , p . jirovecii only cause pneumonia in immunocompromised individual .
healthy people may carry the fungus in - pron - lung with no symptom of disease .
pcp be particularly problematic among hiv patient with compromise immune system .
pcp be usually treat with oral or intravenous bactrim , but atovaquone or pentamidine ( another antiparasitic drug ) be alternative .
if not treat , pcp can progress , lead to a collapse lung and nearly one  zero  zero % mortality .
even with antimicrobial drug therapy , pcp still be responsible for one  zero % of hiv - relate death .
the cytological examination , use direct immunofluorescence assay ( dfa ) , of a smear from jack 's sputum sample confirm the presence of p . jirovecii ( figure one  four  .  one  five ) .
additionally , the result of jack 's blood test reveal that - pron - white blood cell count have dip , make - pron - more susceptible to the fungus .
- pron - physician review - pron - art regiman and make adjustment .
after a few day of hospitalization , jack be release to continue - pron - antimicrobial therapy at home .
with the adjustment to - pron - art therapy , jack 's cd four count begin to increase and - pron - be able to go back to work .
figure one  four  .  one  five microscopic examination of an induce sputum sample or bronchoaveolar lavage sample typically reveal the organism , as show here .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention ) case in point chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
six  three  three antiprotozoan drug
there be a few mechanism by which antiprotozoan drug target infectious protozoan ( table one  four  .  nine ) .
some be antimetabolite , such as atovaquone , proguanil , and artemisinin .
atovaquone , in addition to be antifungal , block electron transport in protozoan and be use for the treatment of protozoan infection include malaria , babesiosis , and toxoplasmosis .
proguanil be another synthetic antimetabolite that be process in parasitic cell into - pron - active form , which inhibit protozoan folic acid synthesis .
- pron - be often use in combination with atovaquone , and the combination be market as malarone for both malaria treatment and prevention .
artemisinin , a plant - derive antifungal first discover by chinese scientist in the one  nine  seven  zero , be quite effective against malaria .
semisynthetic derivative of artemisinin be more water soluble than the natural version , which make - pron - more bioavailable .
although the exact mechanism of action be unclear , artemisinin appear to act as prodrug that be metabolize by target cell to produce reactive oxygen specie ( ros ) that damage target cell .
due to the rise in resistance to antimalarial drug , artemisinin be also commonly use in combination with other antimalarial compound in artemisinin - base combination therapy ( act ) .
several antimetabolite be use for the treatment of toxoplasmosis cause by the parasite toxoplasma gondii .
the synthetic sulfa drug sulfadiazine competitively inhibit an enzyme in folic acid production in parasite and can be use to treat malaria and toxoplasmosis .
pyrimethamine be a synthetic drug that inhibit a different enzyme in the folic acid production pathway and be often use in combination with sulfadoxine ( another sulfa drug ) for the treatment of malaria or in combination with sulfadiazine for the treatment of toxoplasmosis .
side effect of pyrimethamine include decrease bone marrow activity that may cause increase bruise and low red blood cell count .
when toxicity be a concern , spiramycin , a macrolide protein synthesis inhibitor , be typically administer for the treatment of toxoplasmosis .
two class of antiprotozoan drug interfere with nucleic acid synthesis 
nitroimidazole and quinoline .
nitroimidazole , include semisynthetic metronidazole , which be discuss previously as an antibacterial drug , and synthetic tinidazole , be useful in combat a wide variety of protozoan pathogen , such as giardia lamblia , entamoeba histolytica , and trichomonas vaginalis .
upon introduction into these cell in low - oxygen environment , nitroimidazole become activate and introduce dna strand breakage , interfere with dna replication in target cell .
unfortunately , metronidazole be associate with carcinogenesis ( the development of cancer ) in human .
another type of synthetic antiprotozoan drug that have long be think to specifically interfere with dna replication in certain pathogen be pentamidine .
- pron - have historically be use for the treatment of african sleep sickness ( cause by the protozoan trypanosoma brucei ) and leishmaniasis ( cause by protozoa of the genus leishmania ) , but - pron - be also an alternative treatment for the fungus pneumocystis .
some study indicate that - pron - specifically bind to the dna find within kinetoplast ( kdna  long mitochondrion - like structure unique to trypanosomes ) , lead to the cleavage of kdna .
however , nuclear dna of both the parasite and host remain unaffected .
- pron - also appear to bind to trna , inhibit the addition of amino acid to trna , thus prevent protein synthesis .
possible side effect of pentamidine use include pancreatic dysfunction and liver damage .
the quinoline be a class of synthetic compound relate to quinine , which have a long history of use against malaria .
quinoline be think to interfere with heme detoxification , which be necessary for the parasite 's effective breakdown of hemoglobin into amino acid inside red blood cell .
the synthetic derivative chloroquine , quinacrine ( also call mepacrine ) , and mefloquine be commonly use as antimalarial , and chloroquine be also use to treat amebiasis typically cause by entamoeba histolytica .
long - term prophylactic use of chloroquine or mefloquine may result in serious side effect , include hallucination or cardiac issue .
patient with glucose -  six  - phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency experience severe anemia when treat with chloroquine .
six  three  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five common antiprotozoan drugs mechanism of action drug class specific drugs
clinical use inhibit electron transport in mitochondria naphthoquinone atovaquone malaria , babesiosis , and toxoplasmosis not applicable proquanil combination therapy with atovaquone for malaria treatment and prevention sulfonamide sulfadiazine malaria and toxoplasmosi
inhibit folic acid synthesis
not applicable pyrimethamine combination therapy with sulfadoxine ( sulfa drug ) for malaria produce damage reactive oxygen specie not applicable artemisinin combination therapy to treat malaria nitroimidazoles metronidazole , tinidazole infections cause by giardia lamblia , entamoeba histolytica , and trichomonas vaginalis inhibit dna synthesis
not applicable pentamidine african sleep sickness and leishmaniasis inhibit heme chloroquine malaria and infection with e . histolytica detoxification quinolines mepacrine , mefloquine malaria table one  four  .  eight  list two mode of action for antiprotozoan drug .
antihelminthic drug
because helminth be multicellular eukaryote like human , develop drug with selective toxicity against - pron - be extremely challenging .
despite this , several effective class have be develop ( table one  four  .  nine ) .
synthetic benzimidazole , like mebendazole and albendazole , bind to helminthic β - tubulin , prevent microtubule formation .
microtubule in the intestinal cell of the worm seem to be particularly affect , lead to a reduction in glucose uptake .
besides - pron - activity against a broad range of helminth , benzimidazole be also active against many protozoan , fungus , and virus , and - pron - use for inhibit mitosis and cell cycle progression in cancer cell be under study . [ one  three ] possible side effect of - pron - use include liver damage and bone marrow suppression .
the avermectin be member of the macrolide family that be first discover from a japanese soil isolate , streptomyce avermectinius .
a more potent semisynthetic derivative of avermectin be ivermectin , which bind to glutamate - gate chloride channel specific to invertebrate include helminth , block neuronal transmission and cause starvation , paralysis , and death of the worm .
ivermectin be use to treat roundworm disease , include onchocerciasis ( also call river blindness , cause by the worm onchocerca volvulus ) and strongyloidiasis ( cause by the worm strongyloides stercoralis or s . fuelleborni ) .
ivermectin also can also treat parasitic insect like mite , one  three .
b . chu et al .
“
a benzimidazole derivative exhibiting antitumor activity blocks egfr and her two activity and upregulates dr five in breast cancer cells .
”
cell death and disease six
( two  zero  one  five  ) e one  six  eight  six chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug six  three  five lice , and bed bug , and be nontoxic to human .
niclosamide be a synthetic drug that have be use for over five  zero year to treat tapeworm infection .
although - pron - mode of action be not entirely clear , niclosamide appear to inhibit atp formation under anaerobic condition and inhibit oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of - pron - target pathogen .
niclosamide be not absorb from the gastrointestinal tract , thus - pron - can achieve high localize intestinal concentration in patient .
recently , - pron - have be show to also have antibacterial , antiviral , and antitumor activities . [ one  four ][ one  five ][ one  six ]
another synthetic antihelminthic drug be praziquantel , which use for the treatment of parasitic tapeworm and liver fluke , and be particularly useful for the treatment of schistosomiasis ( cause by blood fluke from three genera of schistosoma ) .
- pron - mode of action remain unclear , but - pron - appear to cause the influx of calcium into the worm , result in intense spasm and paralysis of the worm .
- pron - be often use as a preferred alternative to niclosamide in the treatment of tapeworm when gastrointestinal discomfort limit niclosamide use .
the thioxanthenone , another class of synthetic drug structurally relate to quinine , exhibit antischistosomal activity by inhibit rna synthesis .
the thioxanthenone lucanthone and - pron - metabolite hycanthone be the first use clinically , but serious neurological , gastrointestinal , cardiovascular , and hepatic side effect lead to - pron - discontinuation .
oxamniquine , a less toxic derivative of hycanthone , be only effective against s . mansoni , one of the three specie know to cause schistosomiasis in human .
praziquantel be develop to target the other two schistosome specie , but concern about increase resistance have renew interest in develop additional derivative of oxamniquine to target all three clinically important schistosome specie .
common antihelminthic drugs mechanism of action drug class specific drugs
clinical uses inhibit microtubule formation , reduce glucose uptake benzimidazoles mebendazole , albendazole variety of helminth infection block neuronal transmission , cause paralysis and starvation avermectins ivermectin roundworm disease , include river blindness and strongyloidiasis , and treatment of parasitic insect inhibit atp production not applicable
niclosamide intestinal tapeworm infection induce calcium influx not applicable praziquantel schistosomiasis ( blood fluke )
inhibit rna synthesis thioxanthenones lucanthone , hycanthone ,
oxamniquine schistosomiasis ( blood fluke )
table one  four  .  nine

why be antihelminthic drug difficult to develop ?
one  four .
j . - x . pan et al .
“ niclosamide , an old antihelminthic agent , demonstrates antitumor activity by block multiple
signaling pathways of cancer stem cells .
" chinese journal of cancer three  one
no .
four ( two  zero  one  two  )  one  seven  eight – one  eight  four . one  five .
f . imperi et al .
“
new life for an old drug 
the anthelmintic drug niclosamide inhibit pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum sensing .
"
antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
five  seven
no .
two ( two  zero  one  three  )  nine  nine  six - one  zero  zero  five .
one  six .
a . jurgeit et al .
“
niclosamide be a proton carrier and targets acidic endosomes with broad antiviral effects .
”
plos pathogens eight
no .
one  zero ( two  zero  one  two  ) e one  zero  zero  two  nine  seven  six .
six  three  six chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five antiviral drug
unlike the complex structure of fungi , protozoa , and helminth , viral structure be simple , consist of nucleic acid , a protein coat , viral enzyme , and , sometimes , a lipid envelope .
furthermore , virus be obligate intracellular pathogen that use the host 's cellular machinery to replicate .
these characteristic make - pron - difficult to develop drug with selective toxicity against virus .
many antiviral drug be nucleoside analog and function by inhibit nucleic acid biosynthesis .
for example , acyclovir ( market as zovirax ) be a synthetic analog of the nucleoside guanosine
( figure one  four  .  one  six ) .
- pron - be activate by the herpe simplex viral enzyme thymidine kinase and , when add to a grow dna strand during replication , cause chain termination .
- pron - specificity for virus - infect cell come from both the need for a viral enzyme to activate - pron - and the increased affinity of the activate form for viral dna polymerase compare to host cell dna polymerase .
acyclovir and - pron - derivative be frequently use for the treatment of herpe virus infection , include genital herpe , chickenpox , shingle , epstein - barr virus infection , and cytomegalovirus infection .
acyclovir can be administer either topically or systemically , depend on the infection .
one possible side effect of - pron - use include nephrotoxicity .
the drug adenine - arabinoside , market as vidarabine , be a synthetic analog to deoxyadenosine that have a mechanism of action similar to that of acyclovir .
- pron - be also effective for the treatment of various human herpe virus .
however , because of possible side effect involve low white blood cell count and neurotoxicity , treatment with acyclovir be now prefer .
ribavirin , another synthetic guanosine analog , work by a mechanism of action that be not entirely clear .
- pron - appear to interfere with both dna and rna synthesis , perhaps by reduce intracellular pool of guanosine triphosphate ( gtp ) .
ribavarin also appear to inhibit the rna polymerase of hepatitis c virus .
- pron - be primarily use for the treatment of the rna virus like hepatitis c ( in combination therapy with interferon ) and respiratory syncytial virus .
possible side effect of ribavirin use include anemia and developmental effect on unborn child in pregnant patient .
in recent year , another nucleotide analog , sofosbuvir ( solvaldi ) , have also be develop for the treatment of hepatitis c . sofosbuvir be a uridine analog that interfere with viral polymerase activity .
- pron - be commonly coadministere with ribavirin , with and without interferon .
inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis be not the only target of synthetic antiviral .
although the mode of action of amantadine and - pron - relative rimantadine be not entirely clear , these drug appear to bind to a transmembrane protein that be involve in the escape of the influenza virus from endosome .
block escape of the virus also prevent viral rna release into host cell and subsequent viral replication .
increase resistance have limit the use of amantadine and rimantadine in the treatment of influenza a . use of amantadine can result in neurological side effect , but the side effect of rimantadine seem less severe .
interestingly , because of - pron - effect on brain chemical such as dopamine and nmda ( n - methyl d - aspartate ) , amantadine and rimantadine be also use for the treatment of parkinson 's disease .
neuraminidase inhibitor , include olsetamivir ( tamiflu ) , zanamivir ( relenza ) , and peramivir ( rapivab ) , specifically target influenza virus by block the activity of influenza virus neuraminidase , prevent the release of the virus from infected cell .
these three antiviral can decrease flu symptom and shorten the duration of illness , but - pron - differ in - pron - mode of administration  olsetamivir be administer orally , zanamivir be inhale , and peramivir be administer intravenously .
resistance to these neuraminidase inhibitor still seem to be minimal .
pleconaril be a synthetic antiviral under development that show promise for the treatment of picornavirus .
use of pleconaril for the treatment of the common cold cause by rhinovirus be not approve by the fda in two  zero  zero  two because of lack of prove effectiveness , lack of stability , and association with irregular menstruation .
- pron - further development for this purpose be halt in two  zero  zero  seven .
however , pleconaril be still be investigate for use in the treatment of life - threaten complication of enterovirus , such as meningitis and sepsis .
- pron - be also be investigate for use in the global eradication of a specific enterovirus ,
polio . [ one  seven ] pleconaril seem to work by bind to the viral capsid and prevent the uncoating of viral particle inside host cell during viral infection .
virus with complex life cycle , such as hiv , can be more difficult to treat .
first , hiv target cd four  - positive white blood cell , which be necessary for a normal immune response to infection .
second , hiv be a retrovirus , mean one  seven .
m . j . abzug .
"
the enteroviruses  problem in need of treatments .
” journal of infection six  eight no .
s one
( two  zero  one  four  )  one  zero  eight – one  four .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  three  seven that - pron - convert - pron - rna genome into a dna copy that integrate into the host cell 's genome , thus hide within host cell dna .
third , the hiv reverse transcriptase lack proofread activity and introduce mutation that allow for rapid development of antiviral drug resistance .
to help prevent the emergence of resistance , a combination of specific synthetic antiviral drug be typically use in art for hiv ( figure one  four  .  one  seven ) .
the reverse transcriptase inhibitor block the early step of convert viral rna genome into dna , and can include competitive nucleoside analog inhibitor ( e . g . , azidothymidine / zidovudine , or azt ) and non - nucleoside noncompetitive inhibitor ( e . g . , etravirine ) that bind reverse transcriptase and cause an inactivate conformational change .
drug call protease inhibitor ( e . g . , ritonavir ) block the processing of viral protein and prevent viral maturation .
protease inhibitor be also be develop for the treatment of other viral types . [ one  eight ]
for example , simeprevir ( olysio ) have be approve for the treatment of hepatitis c and be administer with ribavirin and interferon in combination therapy .
the integrase inhibitor ( e . g . , raltegravir ) , block the activity of the hiv integrase responsible for the recombination of a dna copy of the viral genome into the host cell chromosome .
additional drug class for hiv treatment include the ccr five antagonist and the fusion inhibitor ( e . g . , enfuviritide ) , which prevent the binding of hiv to the host cell coreceptor ( chemokine receptor type five [ ccr five ] ) and the merging of the viral envelope with the host cell membrane , respectively .
table one  four  .  one  zero show the various therapeutic class of antiviral drug , categorize by mode of action , with example of each .
one  eight .
b . l . pearlman .
“ protease inhibitors for the treatment of chronic hepatitis c
genotype -  one infection  the new standard of care .
"
lancet infectious diseases one  two
no .
nine
( two  zero  one  two  )  seven  one  seven – seven  two  eight . six  three  eight chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
one  four  .  one  six acyclovir be a structural analog of guanosine .
- pron - be specifically activate by the viral enzyme thymidine kinase and then preferentially bind to viral dna polymerase , lead to chain termination during dna replication .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  three  nine figure one  four  .  one  seven antiretroviral therapy ( art ) be typically use for the treatment of hiv .
the target of drug class currently in use be show here .
( credit  modification of work by thomas splettstoesser )
common antiviral drugs mechanism of
action drug clinical use acyclovir
herpes virus infection azidothymidine / zidovudine ( azt )
hiv infection ribavirin hepatitis c virus and respiratory syncytial virus infection
vidarabine herpes virus infection nucleoside
analog inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis sofosbuvir hepatitis c virus infection non - nucleoside noncompetitive inhibition etravirine hiv infection
inhibit escape of virus from endosome amantadine , rimantadine infection with influenza virus inhibit neuraminadase olsetamivir , zanamivir , peramivir infections with influenza virus table
one  four  .  one  zero six  four  zero chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five common antiviral drugs mechanism of action drug clinical
use inhibit viral uncoating pleconaril serious enterovirus infection
inhibition of protease ritonavir hiv infection simeprevir hepatitis c virus infection inhibition of integrase
raltegravir hiv infection inhibition of membrane fusion enfuviritide hiv
infection table one  four  .  one  zero

why be hiv difficult to treat with antiviral ?
to learn more about the various class of antiretroviral drug use in the art of hiv infection , explore each of the drug in the hiv drug class provide by us department of health and human services at this ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two hivusdepthea ) website .
one  four  .  five drug resistance learning objectives

explain the concept of drug resistance 
describe how microorganism develop or acquire drug resistance 
describe the different mechanism of antimicrobial drug resistance antimicrobial resistance be not a new phenomenon .
in nature , microbe be constantly evolve in order to overcome the antimicrobial compound produce by other microorganism .
human development of antimicrobial drug and - pron - widespread clinical use have simply provide another selective pressure that promote further evolution .
several important factor can accelerate the evolution of drug resistance .
these include the overuse and misuse of antimicrobial , inappropriate use of antimicrobial , subtherapeutic dosing , and patient noncompliance with the recommend course of treatment .
exposure of a pathogen to an antimicrobial compound can select for chromosomal mutation confer resistance , which can be transfer vertically to subsequent microbial generation and eventually become predominant in a microbial population that be repeatedly expose to the antimicrobial .
alternatively , many gene responsible for drug resistance be find on plasmid or in transposon that can be transfer easily between microbe through horizontal gene transfer ( see how asexual prokaryotes achieve genetic diversity ) .
transposon also have the ability to move resistance gene between plasmid and chromosome to further promote the spread of resistance .
link to learn chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  four  one mechanisms for drug resistance there be several common mechanism for drug resistance , which be summarize in figure one  four  .  one  eight .
these mechanism include enzymatic modification of the drug , modification of the antimicrobial target , and prevention of drug penetration or accumulation .
figure one  four  .  one  eight
there be multiple strategy that microbe use to develop resistance to antimicrobial drug .
( not show  target overproduction , target mimicry , and enzymatic bypass ) .
( credit  modification of work by gerard d wright )
drug modification or inactivation resistance gene may code for enzyme that chemically modify an antimicrobial , thereby inactivate - pron - , or destroy an antimicrobial through hydrolysis .
resistance to many type of antimicrobial occur through this mechanism .
for example , aminoglycoside resistance can occur through enzymatic transfer of chemical group to the drug molecule , impair the binding of the drug to - pron - bacterial target .
for β - lactam , bacterial resistance can involve the enzymatic hydrolysis of the β - lactam bond within the β - lactam ring of the drug molecule .
once the β - lactam bond be break , the drug lose - pron - antibacterial activity .
this mechanism of resistance be mediate by β - lactamase , which be the most common mechanism of β - lactam resistance .
inactivation of rifampin commonly occur through glycosylation , phosphorylation , or adenosine diphosphate ( adp ) ribosylation , and resistance to macrolide and lincosamide can also occur due to enzymatic inactivation of the drug or modification .
prevention of cellular uptake or efflux microbes may develop resistance mechanism that involve inhibit the accumulation of an antimicrobial drug , which then prevent the drug from reach - pron - cellular target .
this strategy be common among gram - negative six  four  two chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five pathogen and can involve change in outer membrane lipid composition , porin channel selectivity , and / or porin channel concentration .
for example , a common mechanism of carbapenem resistance among pseudomonas aeruginosa be to decrease the amount of - pron - oprd porin , which be the primary portal of entry for carbapenem through the outer membrane of this pathogen .
additionally , many gram - positive and gram - negative pathogenic bacteria produce efflux pump that actively transport an antimicrobial drug out of the cell and prevent the accumulation of drug to a level that would be antibacterial .
for example , resistance to β - lactam , tetracycline , and fluoroquinolone commonly occur through active efflux out of the cell , and - pron - be rather common for a single efflux pump to have the ability to translocate multiple type of antimicrobial .
target modification
because antimicrobial drug have very specific target , structural change to those target can prevent drug binding , render the drug ineffective .
through spontaneous mutation in the gene encode antibacterial drug target , bacteria have an evolutionary advantage that allow - pron - to develop resistance to drug .
this mechanism of resistance development be quite common .
genetic change impact the active site of penicillin - bind protein ( pbps ) can inhibit the binding of β - lactam drug and provide resistance to multiple drug within this class .
this mechanism be very common among strain of streptococcus pneumoniae , which alter - pron - own pbp through genetic mechanism .
in contrast , strain of staphylococcus aureus develop resistance to methicillin ( mrsa ) through the acquisition of a new low - affinity pbp , rather than structurally alter - pron - exist pbp .
not only do this new low - affinity pbp provide resistance to methicillin but - pron - provide resistance to virtually all β - lactam drug , with the exception of the new fifth - generation cephalosporin design specifically to kill mrsa .
other example of this resistance strategy include alteration in  ribosome subunit , provide resistance to macrolide , tetracycline , and aminoglycosides   lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) structure , provide resistance to polymyxin   rna polymerase , provide resistance to rifampin   dna gyrase , provide resistance to fluoroquinolone   metabolic enzyme , provide resistance to sulfa drug , sulfone , and trimethoprim  and  peptidoglycan subunit peptide chain , provide resistance to glycopeptide .
target overproduction or enzymatic bypass
when an antimicrobial drug function as an antimetabolite , target a specific enzyme to inhibit - pron - activity , there be additional way that microbial resistance may occur .
first , the microbe may overproduce the target enzyme such that there be a sufficient amount of antimicrobial - free enzyme to carry out the proper enzymatic reaction .
second , the bacterial cell may develop a bypass that circumvent the need for the functional target enzyme .
both of these strategy have be find as mechanism of sulfonamide resistance .
vancomycin resistance among s . aureus have be show to involve the decrease cross - linkage of peptide chain in the bacterial cell wall , which provide an increase in target for vancomycin to bind to in the outer cell wall .
increase bind of vancomycin in the outer cell wall provide a blockage that prevent free drug molecule from penetrate to where - pron - can block new cell wall synthesis .
target mimicry
a recently discover mechanism of resistance call target mimicry involve the production of protein that bind and sequester drug , prevent the drug from bind to - pron - target .
for example , mycobacterium tuberculosis produce a protein with regular pentapeptide repeat that appear to mimic the structure of dna .
this protein bind fluoroquinolone , sequester - pron - and keep - pron - from bind to dna , provide m . tuberculosis resistance to fluoroquinolone .
protein that mimic the a - site of the bacterial ribosome have be find to contribute to aminoglycoside resistance as well . [ one  nine
] one  nine .
d . h . fong , a . m . berghuis .
“
substrate promiscuity of an aminoglycoside antibiotic resistance enzyme via target mimicry .
”
embo chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  four  three  list several mechanism for drug resistance .
multidrug - resistant microbes and cross resistance
from a clinical perspective , - pron - great concern be multidrug - resistant microbe ( mdr ) and cross resistance .
mdr be colloquially know as " superbug " and carry one or more resistance mechanism ( s ) , make - pron - resistant to multiple antimicrobial .
in cross - resistance , a single resistance mechanism confer resistance to multiple antimicrobial drug .
for example , have an efflux pump that can export multiple antimicrobial drug be a common way for microbe to be resistant to multiple drug by use a single resistance mechanism .
in recent year , several clinically important superbug have emerge , and the cdc report that superbug be responsible for more than two million infection in the us annually , result in at least two  three  ,  zero  zero  zero fatalities . [ two  zero ]
several of the superbug discuss in the following section have be dub the eskape pathogen .
this acronym refer to the name of the pathogen ( enterococcus faecium , staphylococcus aureus , klebsiella pneumoniae , acinetobacter baumannii , pseudomonas aeruginosa and enterobacter spp . )
but - pron - be also fitting in that these pathogen be able to " escape " many conventional form of antimicrobial therapy .
as such , infection by eskape pathogen can be difficult to treat and - pron - cause a large number of nosocomial infection .
methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ) methicillin , a semisynthetic penicillin , be design to resist inactivation by β - lactamase .
unfortunately , soon after the introduction of methicillin to clinical practice , methicillin - resistant strain of s . aureus appear and start to spread .
the mechanism of resistance , acquisition of a new low - affinity pbp , provide s . aureus with resistance to all available β - lactam .
strain of methicillin - resistant s . aureus ( mrsa ) be widespread opportunistic pathogen and a particular concern for skin and other wound infection , but may also cause pneumonia and septicemia .
although originally a problem in health - care setting ( hospital - acquire mrsa [ ha - mrsa ] ) , mrsa infection be now also acquire through contact with contaminated member of the general public , call community - associate mrsa ( ca - mrsa ) .
approximately one - third of the population carry s . aureus as a member of - pron - normal nasal microbiota without illness , and about six % of these strain be methicillin resistant . [ two  one ][ two  two ]
clavulanic acid  penicillin 's little helper
with the introduction of penicillin in the early one  nine  four  zero , and - pron - subsequent mass production , society begin to think of antibiotic as miracle cure for a wide range of infectious disease .
unfortunately , as early as one  nine  four  five , penicillin resistance be first document and start to spread .
great than nine  zero % of current s . aureus clinical isolate be resistant to penicillin . [ two  three ]
although develop new antimicrobial drug be one solution to this problem , scientist have explore new micro connections journal two  one
no .
one  zero ( two  zero  zero  two  )  two  three  two  three – two  three  three  one .
two  zero .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
antibiotic / antimicrobial resistance .
”
http / / www . cdc . gov / drugresistance / index . html .
access june two , two  zero  one  six .
two  one .
a . s . kalokhe et al .
“
multidrug - resistant tuberculosis drug susceptibility and molecular
diagnostic testing  a review of the literature .
american journal of the medical sciences
three  four  five no .
two
( two  zero  one  three  )  one  four  three – one  four  eight .
two  two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ) 
general information about mrsa in the community .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / mrsa / community / index . html .
accessed june two , two  zero  one  six six  four  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five approach , include the development of compound that inactivate resistance mechanism .
the development of clavulanic acid represent an early example of this strategy .
clavulanic acid be a molecule produce by the bacterium streptococcus clavuligerus .
- pron - contain a β - lactam ring , make - pron - structurally similar to penicillin and other β - lactam , but show no clinical effectiveness when administer on - pron - own .
instead , clavulanic acid bind irreversibly within the active site of β - lactamase and prevent - pron - from inactivate a coadministered penicillin .
clavulanic acid be first develop in the one  nine  seven  zero and be mass market in combination with amoxicillin begin in the one  nine  eight  zero under the brand name augmentin .
as be typically the case , resistance to the amoxicillinclavulanic acid combination soon appear .
resistance most commonly result from bacteria increase production of - pron - β - lactamase and overwhelm the inhibitory effect of clavulanic acid , mutate - pron - β - lactamase
so - pron - be no longer inhibit by clavulanic acid , or from acquire a new β - lactamase that be not inhibit by clavulanic acid .
despite increase resistance concern , clavulanic acid and relate β - lactamase inhibitor ( sulbactam and tazobactam ) represent an important new strategy  the development of compound that directly inhibit antimicrobial resistance - confer enzyme .
vancomycin - resistant enterococci and staphylococcus aureus vancomycin be only effective against gram - positive organism , and - pron - be use to treat wound infection , septic infection , endocarditis , and meningitis that be cause by pathogen resistant to other antibiotic .
- pron - be consider one of the last line of defense against such resistant infection , include mrsa .
with the rise of antibiotic resistance in the one  nine  seven  zero and one  nine  eight  zero , vancomycin use increase , and - pron - be not surprising that - pron - see the emergence and spread of vancomycin - resistant enterococci ( vre ) , vancomycin - resistant s . aureus ( vrsa ) , and vancomycin - intermediate s . aureus ( visa ) .
the mechanism of vancomycin resistance among enterococci be target modification involve a structural change to the peptide component of the peptidoglycan subunit , prevent vancomycin from bind .
these strain be typically spread among patient in clinical setting by contact with health - care worker and contaminate surface and medical equipment .
visa and vrsa strain differ from each other in the mechanism of resistance and the degree of resistance each mechanism confer .
visa strain exhibit intermediate resistance , with a minimum inhibitory concentration ( mic ) of four – eight μg / ml , and the mechanism involve an increase in vancomycin target .
visa strain decrease the crosslinking of peptide chain in the cell wall , provide an increase in vancomycin target that trap vancomycin in the outer cell wall .
in contrast , vrsa strain acquire vancomycin resistance through horizontal transfer of resistance gene from vre , an opportunity provide in individual coinfecte with both vre and mrsa .
vrsa exhibit a high level of resistance , with mic of one  six μg / ml or higher . [ two  four ]
in the case of all three type of vancomycin - resistant bacteria , rapid clinical identification be necessary so proper procedure to limit spread can be implement .
the oxazolidinone like linezolid be useful for the treatment of these vancomycin - resistant , opportunistic pathogen , as well as mrsa .
extend - spectrum β - lactamase – produce gram - negative pathogens gram - negative pathogen that produce extend - spectrum β - lactamase ( esbls ) show resistance well beyond just penicillin .
the spectrum of β - lactam inactivate by esbl provide for resistance to all penicillin , cephalosporin , monobactam , and the β - lactamase - inhibitor combination , but not the carbapenem .
an even great concern be that the gene encode for esbl be usually find on mobile plasmid that also contain gene for resistance to other drug class ( e . g . , fluoroquinolone , aminoglycoside , tetracycline ) , and may be readily spread to other bacteria by horizontal gene transfer .
these multidrug - resistant bacteria be member of the intestinal microbiota of some individual , but - pron - be also important cause of opportunistic infection in hospitalize patient , from whom - pron - two  three .
f . d . lowy .
“
antimicrobial resistance 
the example of staphylococcus aureus .
” journal of clinical investigation one  one  one
no .
nine ( two  zero  zero  three  )  one  two  six  five – one  two  seven  three .
two  four .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ healthcare - associated infections ( hia ) 
general information about visa / vrsa .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / hai / organisms / visa_vrsa / visa_vrsa . html .
access june two , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  four  five can be spread to other people .
carbapenem - resistant gram - negative bacteria
the occurrence of carbapenem - resistant enterobacteriaceae ( cre ) and carbapenem resistance among other gramnegative bacteria ( e . g . , p . aeruginosa , acinetobacter baumannii , stenotrophomonas maltophila ) be a grow healthcare concern .
these pathogen develop resistance to carbapenem through a variety of mechanism , include production of carbapenemase ( broad - spectrum β - lactamase that inactivate all β - lactam , include carbapenem ) , active efflux of carbapenem out of the cell , and / or prevention of carbapenem entry through porin channel .
similar to concern with esbl , carbapenem - resistant , gram - negative pathogen be usually resistant to multiple class of antibacterial , and some have even develop pan - resistance ( resistance to all available antibacterial ) .
infection with carbapenem - resistant , gram - negative pathogen commonly occur in health - care setting through interaction with contaminated individual or medical device , or as a result of surgery .
multidrug - resistant mycobacterium tuberculosis
the emergence of multidrug - resistant mycobacterium tuberculosis ( mdr - tb ) and extensively drug - resistant mycobacterium tuberculosis ( xdr - tb ) be also of significant global concern .
mdr - tb strain be resistant to both rifampin and isoniazid , the drug combination typically prescribe for treatment of tuberculosis .
xdr - tb strain be additionally resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of three other drug ( amikacin , kanamycin , or capreomycin ) use as a second line of treatment , leave these patient very few treatment option .
both type of pathogen be particularly problematic in immunocompromised person , include those suffer from hiv infection .
the development of resistance in these strain often result from the incorrect use of antimicrobial for tuberculosis treatment , select for resistance .

how do drug resistance lead to superbug ?
to learn more about the top one  eight drug - resistant threat ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two cdc one  eight drugres ) to the us , visit the cdc 's website .
factory farming and drug resistance
although animal husbandry have long be a major part of agriculture in america , the rise of concentrated animal feeding operation ( cafos ) since the one  nine  five  zero have bring about some new environmental issue , include the contamination of water and air with biological waste , and ethical issue regard animal right also be associate with grow animal in this way .
additionally , the increase in cafos involve the extensive use of antimicrobial drug in raise livestock .
antimicrobial be use to prevent the development of infectious disease in the close quarter of cafo  however , the majority of antimicrobial use in factory link to learning micro connections six  four  six chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five farming be for the promotion of growth - in other word , to grow large animal .
the mechanism underlie this enhance growth remain unclear .
these antibiotic may not necessarily be the same as those use clinically for human , but - pron - be structurally relate to drug use for human .
as a result , use of antimicrobial drug in animal can select for antimicrobial resistance , with these resistant bacteria become cross - resistant to drug typically use in human .
for example , tylosin use in animal appear to select for bacteria also cross - resistant to other macrolide , include erythromycin , commonly use in human .
concentration of the drug - resistant bacterial strain generate by cafo become increase in water and soil surround these farm .
if not directly pathogenic in human , these resistant bacteria may serve as a reservoir of mobile genetic element that can then pass resistance gene to human pathogen .
fortunately , the cooking process typically inactivate any antimicrobial remain in meat , so human typically be not directly ingest these drug .
nevertheless , many people be call for more judicious use of these drug , perhaps charge farmer user fee to reduce indiscriminate use .
in fact , in two  zero  one  two , the fda publish guideline for farmer who voluntarily phase out the use of antimicrobial drug except under veterinary supervision and when necessary to ensure animal health .
although follow the guideline be voluntary at this time , the fda do recommend what - pron - call
" judicious " use of antimicrobial drug in food - produce animal in an effort to decrease antimicrobial resistance .
part three
unfortunately , marisa 's urinary tract infection do not resolve with ciprofloxacin treatment .
laboratory testing show that - pron - infection be cause by a strain of klebsiella pneumoniae with significant antimicrobial resistance .
the resistance profile of this k . pneumoniae include resistance to the carbapenem class of antibacterial , a group of β - lactam that be typically reserve for the treatment of highly resistant bacteria .
k . pneumoniae be an opportunistic , capsulated , gram - negative rod that may be a member of the normal microbiota of the intestinal tract , but may also cause a number of disease , include pneumonia and uti .
specific laboratory test look for carbapenemase production be perform on marisa 's sample and come back positive .
base upon this result , in combination with - pron - health history , production of a carbapenemase know as the new delhi metallo - β - lactamase ( ndm ) be suspect .
although the origin of the ndm carbapenemase be not completely know , many patient infect with ndm - contain strain have travel history involve hospitalization in india or surround country .

how would doctor determine which type of antimicrobial drug should be administer ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  four  .  six test the effectiveness of antimicrobials learning objectives
 describe how the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test determine the susceptibility of a microbe to an antibacterial drug .

explain the significance of the minimal inhibitory concentration and the minimal bactericidal concentration relative to the effectiveness of an antimicrobial drug .
test the effectiveness of antimicrobial drug against specific organism be important in identify - pron - spectrum of activity and the therapeutic dosage .
this type of test , generally describe as antimicrobial susceptibility testing ( ast ) , be commonly perform in a clinical laboratory .
in this section , - pron - will discuss common method of test clinical focus chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug six  four  seven the effectiveness of antimicrobial .
the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test
the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test have long be use as a starting point for determine the susceptibility of specific microbe to various antimicrobial drug .
the kirby - bauer assay start with a mueller - hinton agar plate on which a confluent lawn be inoculate with a patient 's isolated bacterial pathogen .
filter paper disk impregnate with known amount of antibacterial drug to be test be then place on the agar plate .
as the bacterial inoculum grow , antibiotic diffuse from the circular disk into the agar and interact with the grow bacteria .
antibacterial activity be observe as a clear circular zone of inhibition around the drug - impregnate disk , similar to the disk - diffusion assay depict in figure one  three  .  three  one .
the diameter of the zone of inhibition , measure in millimeter and compare to a standardized chart , determine the susceptibility or resistance of the bacterial pathogen to the drug .
there be multiple factor that determine the size of a zone of inhibition in this assay , include drug solubility , rate of drug diffusion through agar , the thickness of the agar medium , and the drug concentration impregnate into the disk .
due to a lack of standardization of these factor , interpretation of the kirby - bauer disk diffusion assay provide only limited information on susceptibility and resistance to the drug test .
the assay can not distinguish between bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity , and difference in zone size can not be use to compare drug potency or efficacy .
comparison of zone size to a standardized chart will only provide information on the antibacterial to which a bacterial pathogen be susceptible or resistant .

how do one use the information from a kirby - bauer assay to predict the therapeutic effectiveness of an antimicrobial drug in a patient ?
antibiogram 
take some of the guesswork
out of prescriptions
unfortunately , infectious disease do not take a time - out for lab work .
as a result , physician rarely have the luxury of conduct susceptibility testing before - pron - write a prescription .
instead , - pron - rely primarily on the empirical evidence ( i . e . , the sign and symptom of disease ) and - pron - professional experience to make an educated guess as to the diagnosis , causative agent ( s ) , and drug most likely to be effective .
this approach allow treatment to begin sooner so the patient do not have to wait for lab test result .
in many case , the prescription be effective  however , in an age of increase antimicrobial resistance , - pron - be become increasingly more difficult to select the most appropriate empiric therapy .
select an inappropriate empiric therapy not only put the patient at risk but may promote great resistance to the drug prescribe .
recently , study have show that antibiogram be useful tool in the decision - making process of select appropriate empiric therapy .
an antibiogram be a compilation of local antibiotic susceptibility datum break down by bacterial pathogen .
in a november two  zero  one  four study publish in the journal infection control and hospital epidemiology , researcher determine that eight  five % of the prescription order in skilled nursing facility be decide upon empirically , but only three  five % of those prescription be deem appropriate when compare with the eventual pathogen identification and susceptibility profile obtain from the clinical laboratory .
however , in one nursing facility where use of antibiogram be implement to direct selection of empiric therapy , appropriateness of empiric therapy increase from three  two % before antibiogram implementation to four  five % after implementation of antibiograms . [ two  five ]
although these datum be preliminary , - pron - do suggest that health - care facility can reduce the number of inappropriate prescription by use antibiogram to select empiric therapy , thus benefit patient and minimize opportunity for antimicrobial resistance to develop .
micro connections six  four  eight chapter one  four  antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five visit this website to view an interactive antibiogram ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two stanunintanti ) provide by stanford university .
dilution test
as discuss , the limitation of the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test do not allow for a direct comparison of antibacterial potency to guide selection of the good therapeutic choice .
however , antibacterial dilution test can be use to determine a particular drug 's minimal inhibitory concentration ( mic ) , the low concentration of drug that inhibit visible bacterial growth , and minimal bactericidal concentration ( mbc ) , the low drug concentration that kill ≥ nine  nine  .  nine % of the starting inoculum .
determine these concentration help identify the correct drug for a particular pathogen .
for the macrobroth dilution assay , a dilution series of the drug in broth be make in test tube and the same number of cell of a test bacterial strain be add to each tube ( figure one  four  .  one  nine ) .
the mic be determine by examine the tube to find the low drug concentration that inhibit visible growth  this be observe as turbidity ( cloudiness ) in the broth .
tube with no visible growth be then inoculate onto agar medium without antibiotic to determine the mbc .
generally , serum level of an antibacterial should be at least three to five time above the mic for treatment of an infection .
the mic assay can also be perform use nine  six  - well microdilution tray , which allow for the use of small volume and automate dispense device , as well as the testing of multiple antimicrobial and / or microorganism in one tray ( figure one  four  .  two  zero ) .
mic be interpret as the low concentration that inhibit visible growth , the same as for the macrobroth dilution in test tube .
growth may also be interpret visually or by use a spectrophotometer or similar device to detect turbidity or a color change if an appropriate biochemical substrate that change color in the presence of bacterial growth be also include in each well .
the etest be an alternative method use to determine mic , and be a combination of the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test and dilution method .
similar to the kirby - bauer assay , a confluent lawn of a bacterial isolate be inoculate onto the surface of an agar plate .
rather than use circular disk impregnate with one concentration of drug , however , commercially available plastic strip that contain a gradient of an antibacterial be place on the surface of the inoculated agar plate ( figure one  four  .  two  one ) .
as the bacterial inoculum grow , antibiotic diffuse from the plastic strip into the agar and interact with the bacterial cell .
because the rate of drug diffusion be directly relate to concentration , an elliptical zone of inhibition be observe with the etest drug gradient , rather than a circular zone of inhibition observe with the kirby - bauer assay .
to interpret the result , the intersection of the elliptical zone with the gradient on the drug - contain strip indicate the mic .
because multiple strip contain different antimicrobial can be place on the same plate , the mic of multiple antimicrobial can be determine concurrently and directly compare .
however , unlike the macrobroth and microbroth dilution method , the mbc can not be determine with the etest .
link to learning two  five .
j . p . furuno et al .
“
use antibiograms to improve antibiotic prescribing in skilled nursing facilities .
” infection control and hospital epidemiology three  five
no .
suppl s three ( two  zero  one  four  ) s five  six – six  one .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  four  nine figure one  four  .  one  nine
in a dilution test , the low dilution that inhibit turbidity ( cloudiness ) be the mic .
in this example , the mic be eight μg / ml . broth from sample without turbidity can be inoculate onto plate lack the antimicrobial drug .
the low dilution that kill ≥ nine  nine  .  nine % of the starting inoculum be observe on the plate be the mbc .
( credit  modification of work by suzanne wakim ) figure one  four  .  two  zero
a microdilution tray can also be use to determine mic of multiple antimicrobial drug in a single assay .
in this example , the drug concentration increase from left to right and the row with clindamycin , penicillin , and erythromycin have be indicate to the left of the plate .
for penicillin and erythromycin , the low concentration that inhibit visible growth be indicate by red circle and be zero  .  zero  six μg / ml for penicillin and eight μg / ml for erythromycin .
for clindamycin , visible bacterial growth be observe at every concentration up to three  two μg / ml and the mic be interpret as > three  two μg / ml . ( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) six  five  zero chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  four  .  two  one
the etest can be use to determine the mic of an antibiotic .
in this etest , vancomycin be show to have a mic of one  .  five μg / ml against staphylococcus aureus .

compare and contrast mic and mbc .
resolution marisa 's uti be likely cause by the catheterization - pron - have in vietnam .
most bacteria that cause uti be member of the normal gut microbiota , but - pron - can cause infection when introduce to the urinary tract , as may have occur when the catheter be insert .
alternatively , if the catheter - pron - be not sterile , bacteria on - pron - surface could have be introduce into marisa 's body .
the antimicrobial therapy marisa receive in cambodia may also have be a complicating factor because - pron - may have select for antimicrobial - resistant strain already present in - pron - body .
these bacteria would have already contain gene for antimicrobial resistance , either acquire by spontaneous mutation or through horizontal gene transfer , and , therefore , have the good evolutionary advantage for adaptation and growth in the presence of the antimicrobial therapy .
as a result , one of these resistant strain may have be subsequently introduce into - pron - urinary tract .
laboratory testing at the cdc confirm that the strain of klebsiella pneumoniae from marisa 's urine sample be positive for the presence of ndm , a very active carbapenemase that be begin to emerge as a new problem in antimicrobial resistance .
while ndm - positive strain be resistant to a wide range of antimicrobial , - pron - have show susceptibility to tigecycline ( structurally relate to tetracycline ) and the polymyxin b and e ( colistin ) .
to prevent - pron - infection from spread , marisa be isolate from the other patient in a separate room .
all hospital staff interact with - pron - be advise to follow strict protocol to prevent surface and equipment contamination .
this would include especially stringent hand hygiene practice and careful disinfection of all item come into contact with - pron - .
marisa 's infection finally respond to tigecycline and eventually clear .
- pron - be discharge a few week after admission , and a follow - up stool sample show - pron - stool to be free of ndm - containing k . pneumoniae , mean that - pron - be no longer harbor the highly resistant bacterium .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  five  one one  four  .  seven current strategies for antimicrobial discovery learning objectives
 describe the method and strategy use for discovery of new antimicrobial agent .
with the continue evolution and spread of antimicrobial resistance , and now the identification of pan - resistant bacterial pathogen , the search for new antimicrobial be essential for prevent the postantibiotic era .
although development of more effective semisynthetic derivative be one strategy , resistance to - pron - develop rapidly because bacterial pathogen be already resistant to early - generation drug in the family and can easily mutate and develop resistance to the new semisynthetic drug .
today , scientist continue to hunt for new antimicrobial compound and explore new avenue of antimicrobial discovery and synthesis .
- pron - check large number of soil and microbial product for antimicrobial activity by use high - throughput screening method , which use automation to test large number of sample simultaneously .
the recent development of the ichip[ two  six ] allow researcher to investigate the antimicrobial - produce capability of soil microbe that be difficult to grow by standard cultivation technique in the laboratory .
rather than grow the microbe in the laboratory , - pron - be grow in situ - right in the soil .
use of the ichip have result in the discovery of teixobactin , a novel antimicrobial from mount ararat , turkey .
teixobactin target two distinct step in gram - positive cell wall synthesis and for which antimicrobial resistance appear not yet to have evolve .
although soil have be widely examine , other environmental niche have not be test as fully .
since seven  zero % of the earth be cover with water , marine environment could be mine more fully for the presence of antimicrobialproduce microbe .
in addition , researcher be use combinatorial chemistry , a method for make a very large number of related compound from simple precursor , and test - pron - for antimicrobial activity .
an additional strategy that need to be explore further be the development of compound that inhibit resistance mechanism and restore the activity of old drug , such as the strategy describe earlier for β - lactamase inhibitor like clavulanic acid .
finally , develop inhibitor of virulence factor production and function could be a very important avenue .
although this strategy would not be directly antibacterial , drug that slow the progression of an infection could provide an advantage for the immune system and could be use successfully in combination with antimicrobial drug .

what be new source and strategy for develop drug to fight infectious disease ?
the ( free ?
)
market for new antimicrobials there use to be plenty of antimicrobial drug on the market to treat infectious disease .
however , the spread of antimicrobial resistance have create a need for new antibiotic to replace those that be no longer as effective as - pron - once be .
unfortunately , pharmaceutical company be not particularly motivate to fill this need .
as of two  zero  zero  nine , all but five pharmaceutical company have move away from antimicrobial drug development . [ two  seven ]
as a result , the number of fda approval of new antimicrobial have fall drastically in recent decade ( figure one  four  .  two  two ) .
eye on ethics two  six .
l . losee et al .
“
a new antibiotic kills pathogens without detectable resistance .
"
nature five  one  seven
no .
seven  five  three  five ( two  zero  one  five  )  four  five  five – four  five  nine .
six  five  two chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five give
that demand usually encourage supply , one may expect pharmaceutical company to be rush to get back in the business of develop new antibiotic .
but develop new drug be a lengthy process and require large investment in research and development .
pharmaceutical company can typically get a high return on - pron - investment by develop product for chronic , nonmicrobial disease like diabete  such drug must be take for life , and therefore generate more long - term revenue than an antibiotic that do - pron - job in a week or two .
but what will happen when drug like vancomycin , a superantimicrobial reserve for use as a last resort , begin to lose - pron - effectiveness against ever more drug - resistant superbug ?
will drug company wait until all antibiotic have become useless before begin to look for new one ?
recently , - pron - have be suggest that large pharmaceutical company should be give financial incentive to pursue such research .
in september two  zero  one  four , the white house release an executive order entitle " combating antibiotic resistant bacteria , " call upon various government agency and the private sector to work together to “ accelerate basic and applied research and development for new antimicrobial , other therapeutic , and vaccines . ”[ two  eight ]
as a result , as of march two  zero  one  five , president obama 's propose fiscal year two  zero  one  six budget double the amount of federal funding to $ one  .  two billion for “ combat and prevent antibiotic resistance , " which include money for antimicrobial research and development . [ two  nine ]
similar suggestion have also be make on a global scale .
in december two  zero  one  four , a report chair by former goldman sachs economist jim o'neill be publish in the review on antimicrobial resistance . [ three  zero ]
these development reflect the grow belief that for - profit pharmaceutical company must be subsidize to encourage development of new antimicrobial .
but some ask whether pharmaceutical development should be motivate by profit at all .
give that million of life may hang in the balance , some may argue that drug company have an ethical obligation to devote - pron - research and development effort to high - utility drug , as oppose to highly profitable one .
yet this obligation conflict with the fundamental goal of a for - profit company .
be government subsidy enough to ensure that drug company make the public interest a priority , or should government agency assume responsibility for develop critical drug that may have little or no return on investment ?
figure one  four  .  two  two
in recent decade , approval of new antimicrobial by the fda have steadily fall .
in the fiveyear period from one  nine  eight  three – one  nine  eight  seven , one  six new antimicrobial drug be approve , compare to just two from two  zero  zero  eight – two  zero  one  two .
two  seven .
h . w .
boucher et al .
“ bad bugs ,
no drug 
no eskape !
an update from the infectious diseases society of america .
"
clinical infectious diseases four  eight
no .
one
( two  zero  zero  nine  )  one – one  two .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  five  three
to further examine the scope of the problem , view this ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two pbsdecantimic ) video .
to learn more ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two msuantresleah ) about the history of antimicrobial drug discovery , visit michigan state university 's antimicrobial resistance learning site .
summary one  four  .  one history of chemotherapy and antimicrobial discovery 
antimicrobial drug produce by purposeful fermentation and / or contain in plant have be use as traditional medicine in many culture for millennium .

the purposeful and systematic search for a chemical “ magic bullet " that specifically target infectious microbe be initiate by paul ehrlich in the early two  zero th century .

the discovery of the natural antibiotic , penicillin , by alexander fleming in one  nine  two  eight start the modern age of antimicrobial discovery and research .

sulfanilamide , the first synthetic antimicrobial , be discover by gerhard domagk and colleague and be a breakdown product of the synthetic dye , prontosil .
one  four  .  two fundamentals of antimicrobial chemotherapy

antimicrobial drug can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal , and these characteristic be important consideration when select the most appropriate drug .

the use of narrow - spectrum antimicrobial drug be prefer in many case to avoid superinfection and the development of antimicrobial resistance .
 broad - spectrum antimicrobial use be warrant for serious systemic infection when there be no time to determine the causative agent , when narrow - spectrum antimicrobial fail , or for the treatment or prevention of infection with multiple type of microbe .

the dosage and route of administration be important consideration when select an antimicrobial to treat and infection .
other consideration include the patient 's age , mass , ability to take oral medication , liver and kidney function , and possible interaction with other drug the patient may be take .
one  four  .  three mechanisms of antibacterial drugs 
antibacterial compound exhibit selective toxicity , largely due to difference between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structure .
 cell wall synthesis inhibitor , include the β - lactam , the glycopeptide , and bacitracin , interfere with peptidoglycan synthesis , make bacterial cell more prone to osmotic lysis .

there be a variety of broad - spectrum , bacterial protein synthesis inhibitor that selectively target the prokaryotic seven  zero s ribosome , include those that bind to the three  zero s subunit ( aminoglycoside and tetracycline ) and other that bind to the five  zero s subunit ( macrolide , lincosamide , chloramphenicol , and oxazolidinone ) .

polymyxins be lipophilic polypeptide antibiotic that target the lipopolysaccharide component of gramnegative bacteria and ultimately disrupt the integrity of the outer and inner membrane of these bacteria .
link to learning two  eight .
the white house .
national action plan for combat antibiotic - resistant bacteria .
washington , dc  the white house , two  zero  one  five .
two  nine .
white house office of the press secretary .
“
fact sheet 
obama administration releases national action plan to combat
antibiotic -
resistant bacteria .
" march two  seven , two  zero  one  five .
https / / www . whitehouse . gov / the - press - office /  two  zero  one  five  /  zero  three  /  two  seven  / fact - sheet - obama - administration - releasesnational - action - plan - combat - ant three  zero .
review on antimicrobial resistance .
http / / amr - review . org .
accessed june one , two  zero  one  six .
six  five  four chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five

the nucleic acid synthesis inhibitor rifamycin and fluoroquinolone target bacterial rna transcription and dna replication , respectively .

some antibacterial drug be antimetabolite , act as competitive inhibitor for bacterial metabolic enzyme .
sulfonamide and trimethoprim be antimetabolite that interfere with bacterial folic acid synthesis .
isoniazid be an antimetabolite that interfere with mycolic acid synthesis in mycobacteria .
one  four  .  four mechanisms of other antimicrobial drug  because fungi , protozoan , and helminth be eukaryotic organism like human cell , - pron - be more challenging to develop antimicrobial drug that specifically target - pron - .
similarly , - pron - be hard to target virus because human virus replicate inside of human cell .
 antifungal drug interfere with ergosterol synthesis , bind to ergosterol to disrupt fungal cell membrane integrity , or target cell wall - specific component or other cellular protein .

antiprotozoan drug increase cellular level of reactive oxygen specie , interfere with protozoal dna replication ( nuclear versus kdna , respectively ) , and disrupt heme detoxification .

antihelminthic drug disrupt helminthic and protozoan microtubule formation  block neuronal transmission  inhibit anaerobic atp formation and / or oxidative phosphorylation  induce a calcium influx in tapeworm , lead to spasm and paralysis  and interfere with rna synthesis in schistosome .

antiviral drug inhibit viral entry , inhibit viral uncoating , inhibit nucleic acid biosynthesis , prevent viral escape from endosome in host cell , and prevent viral release from infected cell .

because - pron - can easily mutate to become drug resistant , hiv be typically treat with a combination of several antiretroviral drug , which may include reverse transcriptase inhibitor , protease inhibitor , integrase inhibitor , and drug that interfere with viral binding and fusion to initiate infection .
one  four  .  five drug resistance 
antimicrobial resistance be on the rise and be the result of selection of drug - resistant strain in clinical environment , the overuse and misuse of antibacterial , the use of subtherapeutic dos of antibacterial drug , and poor patient compliance with antibacterial drug therapy .
 drug resistance gene be often carry on plasmid or in transposon that can undergo vertical transfer easily and between microbe through horizontal gene transfer .
 common mode of antimicrobial drug resistance include drug modification or inactivation , prevention of cellular uptake or efflux , target modification , target overproduction or enzymatic bypass , and target mimicry .
 problematic microbial strain show extensive antimicrobial resistance be emerge  many of these strain can reside as member of the normal microbiota in individual but also can cause opportunistic infection .
the transmission of many of these highly resistant microbial strain often occur in clinical setting , but can also be community - acquire .
one  four  .  six test the effectiveness of antimicrobials

the kirby - bauer disk diffusion test help determine the susceptibility of a microorganism to various antimicrobial drug .
however , the zone of inhibition measure must be correlate to know standard to determine susceptibility and resistance , and do not provide information on bactericidal versus bacteriostatic activity , or allow for direct comparison of drug potency .
 antibiograms be useful for monitor local trend in antimicrobial resistance / susceptibility and for direct appropriate selection of empiric antibacterial therapy .

there be several laboratory method available for determine the minimum inhibitory concentration ( mic ) of an antimicrobial drug against a specific microbe .
the minimal bactericidal concentration ( mbc ) can also be determine , typically as a follow - up experiment to mic determination use the tube dilution method .
one  four  .  seven current strategies for antimicrobial discovery 
current research into the development of antimicrobial drug involve the use of high - throughput screening and combinatorial chemistry technology .
chapter one  four
 antimicrobial drug six  five  five
 new technology be be develop to discover novel antibiotic from soil microorganism that can not be culture by standard laboratory method .
 additional strategy include search for antibiotic from source other than soil , identify new antibacterial target , use combinatorial chemistry to develop novel drug , develop drug that inhibit resistance mechanism , and develop drug that target virulence factor and hold infection in check .
chapter one  five microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity figure one  five  .  one
although medical professional rely heavily on sign and symptom to diagnose disease and prescribe treatment , many disease can produce similar sign and symptom .
( credit leave  modification of work by u . s . navy )
chapter outline one  five  .  one characteristics of infectious disease one  five  .  two
how pathogens cause disease one  five  .  three virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens one  five  .  four virulence factors of eukaryotic pathogens introduction jane wake up one spring morning feel not quite - pron - .
- pron - throat feel a bit dry and - pron - be sniffle .
- pron - wonder why - pron - feel so lousy .
be - pron - because of a change in the weather ?
the pollen count ?
be - pron - come down with something ?
do - pron - catch a bug from - pron - coworker who sneeze on - pron - in the elevator yesterday ?
the sign and symptom - pron - associate with illness can have many different cause .
sometimes - pron - be the direct result of a pathogenic infection , but in other case - pron - result from a response by - pron - immune system to a pathogen or another perceive threat .
for example , in response to certain pathogen , the immune system may release pyrogen , chemical that cause the body temperature to rise , result in a fever .
this response create a less - than - favorable environment for the pathogen , but - pron - also make - pron - feel sick .
medical professional rely heavily on analysis of sign and symptom to determine the cause of an ailment and prescribe treatment .
in some case , sign and symptom alone be enough to correctly identify the causative agent of a disease , but since few disease produce truly unique symptom , - pron - be often necessary to confirm the identity of the infectious agent by other direct and indirect diagnostic method .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  six  one one  five  .  one characteristics of infectious disease learning objectives  distinguish between sign and symptom of disease 
explain the difference between a communicable disease and a noncommunicable disease  compare different type of infectious disease , include iatrogenic , nosocomial , and zoonotic disease
 identify and describe the stage of an acute infectious disease in term of number of pathogen present and severity of sign and symptom
a disease be any condition in which the normal structure or function of the body be damage or impair .
physical injury or disability be not classify as disease , but there can be several cause for disease , include infection by a pathogen , genetic ( as in many cancer or deficiency ) , noninfectious environmental cause , or inappropriate immune response .
- pron - focus in this chapter will be on infectious disease , although when diagnose infectious disease , - pron - be always important to consider possible noninfectious cause .
sign and symptoms of disease
an infection be the successful colonization of a host by a microorganism .
infection can lead to disease , which cause sign and symptom result in a deviation from the normal structure or functioning of the host .
microorganism that can cause disease be know as pathogen .
the sign of disease be objective and measurable , and can be directly observe by a clinician .
vital sign , which be use to measure the body 's basic function , include body temperature ( normally three  seven ° c [ nine  eight  .  six ° f ] ) , heart rate ( normally six  zero – one  zero  zero beat per minute ) , breathing rate ( normally one  two – one  eight breath per minute ) , and blood pressure ( normally between nine  zero  /  six  zero and one  two  zero  /  eight  zero mm hg ) .
change in any of the body 's vital sign may be indicative of disease .
for example , have a fever ( a body temperature significantly high than three  seven ° c or nine  eight  .  six ° f ) be a sign of disease because - pron - can be measure .
in addition to change in vital sign , other observable condition may be consider sign of disease .
for example , the presence of antibody in a patient 's serum ( the liquid portion of blood that lack clotting factor ) can be observe and measure through blood test and , therefore , can be consider a sign .
however , - pron - be important to note that the presence of antibody be not always a sign of an active disease .
antibody can remain in the body long after an infection have resolve  also , - pron - may develop in response to a pathogen that be in the body but not currently cause disease .
part one michael , a one  zero  - year - old boy in generally good health , go to a birthday party on sunday with - pron - family .
- pron - eat many different food but be the only one in the family to eat the undercooked hot dog serve by the host .
monday morning , - pron - wake up feel achy and nauseous , and - pron - be run a fever of three  eight ° c ( one  zero  zero  .  four ° f ) .
- pron - parent , assume michael have catch the flu , make - pron - stay home from school and limit - pron - activity .
but after four day , michael begin to experience severe headache , and - pron - fever spike to four  zero ° c ( one  zero  four ° f ) .
grow worried , - pron - parent finally decide to take michael to a nearby clinic .

what sign and symptom be michael experience ?

what do these sign and symptom tell - pron - about the stage of michael 's disease ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus six  six  two chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five unlike sign , symptom of disease be subjective .
symptom be feel or experience by the patient , but - pron - can not be clinically confirm or objectively measure .
example of symptom include nausea , loss of appetite , and pain .
such symptom be important to consider when diagnose disease , but - pron - be subject to memory bias and be difficult to measure precisely .
some clinician attempt to quantify symptom by ask patient to assign a numerical value to - pron - symptom .
for example , the wong - baker faces pain - rate scale ask patient to rate - pron - pain on a scale of zero – one  zero .
an alternative method of quantify pain be measure skin conductance fluctuation .
these fluctuation reflect sweat due to skin sympathetic nerve activity result from the stressor of pain . [ one ]
a specific group of sign and symptom characteristic of a particular disease be call a syndrome .
many syndrome be name use a nomenclature base on sign and symptom or the location of the disease .
table one  five  .  one list some of the prefix and suffix commonly use in name syndrome .
nomenclature of symptoms affix
meaning example cyto - cell cytopenia
 reduction in the number of blood cell hepat - of the liver hepatitis  inflammation of the liver - pathy disease neuropathy  a disease affect nerve - emia of the blood bacteremia  presence of bacteria in blood - itis inflammation colitis  inflammation of the colon - lysis destruction hemolysis  destruction of red blood cell - oma tumor lymphoma  cancer of the lymphatic system - osis diseased or abnormal condition leukocytosis  abnormally high number of white blood cell - derma of the skin keratoderma  a thickening of the skin table one  five  .  one clinicians must rely on sign and on ask question about symptom , medical history , and the patient 's recent activity to identify a particular disease and the potential causative agent .
diagnosis be complicate by the fact that different microorganism can cause similar sign and symptom in a patient .
for example , an individual present with symptom of diarrhea may have be infect by one of a wide variety of pathogenic microorganism .
bacterial pathogen associate with diarrheal disease include vibrio cholerae , listeria monocytogene , campylobacter jejuni , and enteropathogenic escherichia coli ( epec ) .
viral pathogen associate with diarrheal disease include norovirus and rotavirus .
parasitic pathogen associate with diarrhea include giardia lamblia and cryptosporidium parvum .
likewise , fever be indicative of many type of infection , from the common cold to the deadly ebola hemorrhagic fever .
finally , some disease may be asymptomatic or subclinical , mean - pron - do not present any noticeable sign or symptom .
for example , most individual infect with herpe simplex virus remain asymptomatic and be unaware that - pron - have be infect .

explain the difference between sign and symptom .
one .
f . savino et al .
“
pain assessment in children
undergoing venipuncture 
the wong – baker faces scale versus skin conductance fluctuations .
"
peerj one ( two  zero  one  three  ) e three  seven 
https / / peerj . com / articles /  three  seven  / chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  six  three classifications of disease
the world health organization 's ( who )
international classification of diseases ( icd ) be use in clinical field to classify disease and monitor morbidity ( the number of case of a disease ) and mortality ( the number of death due to a disease ) .
in this section , - pron - will introduce terminology use by the icd ( and in health - care profession in general ) to describe and categorize various type of disease .
an infectious disease be any disease cause by the direct effect of a pathogen .
a pathogen may be cellular ( bacteria , parasite , and fungi ) or acellular ( virus , viroid , and prion ) .
some infectious disease be also communicable , mean - pron - be capable of be spread from person to person through either direct or indirect mechanism .
some infectious communicable disease be also consider contagious disease , mean - pron - be easily spread from person to person .
not all contagious disease be equally so  the degree to which a disease be contagious usually depend on how the pathogen be transmit .
for example , measle be a highly contagious viral disease that can be transmit when an infect person cough or sneeze and an uninfected person breathe in droplet contain the virus .
gonorrhea be not as contagious as measle because transmission of the pathogen ( neisseria gonorrhoeae ) require close intimate contact ( usually sexual ) between an infected person and an uninfected person .
disease that be contract as the result of a medical procedure be know as iatrogenic disease .
iatrogenic disease can occur after procedure involve wound treatment , catheterization , or surgery if the wound or surgical site become contaminate .
for example , an individual treat for a skin wound may acquire necrotize fasciitis ( an aggressive , " flesh - eat " disease ) if bandage or other dressing become contaminate by clostridium perfringen or one of several other bacteria that can cause this condition .
disease acquire in hospital setting be know as nosocomial disease .
several factor contribute to the prevalence and severity of nosocomial disease .
first , sick patient bring numerous pathogen into hospital , and some of these pathogen can be transmit easily via improperly sterilize medical equipment , bed sheet , call button , door handle , or by clinician , nurse , or therapist who do not wash - pron - hand before touch a patient .
second , many hospital patient have weaken immune system , make - pron - more susceptible to infection .
compound this , the prevalence of antibiotic in hospital setting can select for drug - resistant bacteria that can cause very serious infection that be difficult to treat .
certain infectious disease be not transmit between human directly but can be transmit from animal to human .
such a disease be call zoonotic disease ( or zoonosis ) .
accord to who , a zoonosis be a disease that occur when a pathogen be transfer from a vertebrate animal to a human  however , sometimes the term be define more broadly to include disease transmit by all animal ( include invertebrate ) .
for example , rabie be a viral zoonotic disease spread from animal to human through bite and contact with infected saliva .
many other zoonotic disease rely on insect or other arthropod for transmission .
example include yellow fever ( transmit through the bite of mosquito infect with yellow fever virus ) and rocky mountain spot fever ( transmit through the bite of tick infect with rickettsia rickettsii ) .
in contrast to communicable infectious disease , a noncommunicable infectious disease be not spread from one person to another .
one example be tetanus , cause by clostridium tetani , a bacterium that produce endospore that can survive in the soil for many year .
this disease be typically only transmit through contact with a skin wound  - pron - can not be pass from an infect person to another person .
similarly , legionnaires disease be cause by legionella pneumophila , a bacterium that live within amoebae in moist location like water - cool tower .
an individual may contract legionnaires disease via contact with the contaminated water , but once infect , the individual can not pass the pathogen to other individual .
in addition to the wide variety of noncommunicable infectious disease , noninfectious disease ( those not cause by pathogen ) be an important cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide .
noninfectious disease can be cause by a wide variety factor , include genetic , the environment , or immune system dysfunction , to name a few .
for example , sickle cell anemia be an inherited disease cause by a genetic mutation that can be pass from parent to offspring ( figure one  five  .  two ) .
other type of noninfectious disease be list in table one  five  .  two .
six  six  four
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five type of noninfectious diseases type definition example
inherit
a genetic disease sickle cell anemia congenital disease that be present at or before birth down syndrome degenerative progressive , irreversible loss of function parkinson disease ( affect central nervous system )
nutritional deficiency impaired body function due to lack of nutrient scurvy ( vitamin c deficiency )
endocrine disease involve malfunction of gland that release hormone to regulate body function hypothyroidism – thyroid do not produce enough thyroid hormone , which be important for metabolism neoplastic abnormal growth ( benign or malignant )
some form of cancer idiopathic disease for which the cause be unknown idiopathic juxtafoveal retinal telangiectasia ( dilate , twisted blood vessel in the retina of the eye )
table one  five  .  two figure one  five  .  two blood smear show two disease of the blood .
( a ) malaria be an infectious , zoonotic disease cause by the protozoan pathogen plasmodium falciparum ( show here ) and several other specie of the genus plasmodium .
- pron - be transmit by mosquito to human .
( b ) sickle cell disease be a noninfectious genetic disorder that result in abnormally shape red blood cell , which can stick together and obstruct the flow of blood through the circulatory system .
- pron - be not cause by a pathogen , but rather a genetic mutation .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by ed uthman ) chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity
six  six  five lists of common infectious disease can be find at the follow centers for disease control and prevention ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cdcdis )
( cdc ) , world health organization ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two whodis )
( who ) , and international classification of diseases ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two whoclass ) website .

describe how a disease can be infectious but not contagious .

explain the difference between iatrogenic disease and nosocomial disease .
period of disease
the five period of disease ( sometimes refer to as stage or phase ) include the incubation , prodromal , illness , decline , and convalescence period ( figure one  five  .  three ) .
the incubation period occur in an acute disease after the initial entry of the pathogen into the host ( patient ) .
- pron - be during this time the pathogen begin multiply in the host .
however , there be insufficient number of pathogen particle ( cell or virus ) present to cause sign and symptom of disease .
incubation period can vary from a day or two in acute disease to month or year in chronic disease , depend upon the pathogen .
factor involve in determine the length of the incubation period be diverse , and can include strength of the pathogen , strength of the host immune defense , site of infection , type of infection , and the size infectious dose receive .
during this incubation period , the patient be unaware that a disease be begin to develop .
link to learn six  six  six chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  five  .  three
the progression of an infectious disease can be divide into five period , which be relate to the number of pathogen particle ( red ) and the severity of sign and symptom ( blue ) .
the prodromal period occur after the incubation period .
during this phase , the pathogen continue to multiply and the host begin to experience general sign and symptom of illness , which typically result from activation of the immune system , such as fever , pain , soreness , swelling , or inflammation .
usually , such sign and symptom be too general to indicate a particular disease .
follow the prodromal period be the period of illness , during which the sign and symptom of disease be most obvious and severe .
the period of illness be follow by the period of decline , during which the number of pathogen particle begin to decrease , and the sign and symptom of illness begin to decline .
however , during the decline period , patient may become susceptible to develop secondary infection because - pron - immune system have be weaken by the primary infection .
the final period be know as the period of convalescence .
during this stage , the patient generally return to normal function , although some disease may inflict permanent damage that the body can not fully repair .
infectious disease can be contagious during all five of the period of disease .
which period of disease be more likely to associate with transmissibility of an infection depend upon the disease , the pathogen , and the mechanism by which the disease develop and progress .
for example , with meningitis ( infection of the lining of brain ) , the period of infectivity depend on the type of pathogen cause the infection .
patient with bacterial meningitis be contagious during the incubation period for up to a week before the onset of the prodromal period , whereas patient with viral meningitis become contagious when the first sign and symptom of the prodromal period appear .
with many viral disease associate with rash ( e . g . , chickenpox , measle , rubella , roseola ) , patient be contagious during the incubation period up to a week before the rash develop .
in contrast , with many respiratory infection ( e . g . , cold , influenza , diphtheria , strep throat , and pertussis ) the patient become contagious with the onset of the prodromal period .
depend upon the pathogen , the disease , and the individual infect , transmission can still occur during the period of decline , convalescence , and even long after sign and symptom of the disease disappear .
for example , an individual recover from a diarrheal disease may continue to carry and shed the pathogen in fece for some time , pose a risk of transmission to other through direct contact or indirect contact ( e . g . , through contaminated object or food ) .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  six  seven
 name some of the factor that can affect the length of the incubation period of a particular disease .
acute and chronic diseases
the duration of the period of illness can vary greatly , depend on the pathogen , effectiveness of the immune response in the host , and any medical treatment receive .
for an acute disease , pathologic change occur over a relatively short time ( e . g . , hour , day , or a few week ) and involve a rapid onset of disease condition .
for example , influenza ( cause by influenzavirus ) be consider an acute disease because the incubation period be approximately one – two day .
infect individual can spread influenza to other for approximately five day after become ill .
after approximately one week , individual enter the period of decline .
for a chronic disease , pathologic change can occur over long time span ( e . g . , month , year , or a lifetime ) .
for example , chronic gastritis ( inflammation of the lining of the stomach ) be cause by the gram - negative bacterium helicobacter pylorus .
h . pylorus be able to colonize the stomach and persist in - pron - highly acidic environment by produce the enzyme urease , which modify the local acidity , allow the bacteria to survive indefinitely . [ two ]
consequently , h . pylorus infection can recur indefinitely unless the infection be clear use antibiotics . [ three ] hepatitis b virus can cause a chronic infection in some patient who do not eliminate the virus after the acute illness .
a chronic infection with hepatitis b virus be characterize by the continue production of infectious virus for six month or long after the acute infection , as measure by the presence of viral antigen in blood sample .
in latent disease , as oppose to chronic infection , the causal pathogen go dormant for extended period of time with no active replication .
example of disease that go into a latent state after the acute infection include herpe ( herpe simplex virus [ hsv -  one and hsv -  two ] ) , chickenpox ( varicella - zoster virus [ vzv ] ) , and mononucleosis ( epstein - barr virus [ ebv ] ) .
hsv -  one , hsv -  two , and vzv evade the host immune system by reside in a latent form within cell of the nervous system for long period of time , but - pron - can reactivate to become active infection during time of stress and immunosuppression .
for example , an initial infection by vzv may result in a case of childhood chickenpox , follow by a long period of latency .
the virus may reactivate decade later , cause episode of shingle in adulthood .
ebv go into latency in b cell of the immune system and possibly epithelial cell  - pron - can reactivate year later to produce b - cell lymphoma .

explain the difference between latent disease and chronic disease .
two .
j . g . kusters et al .
pathogenesis of helicobacter pylorus infection .
clinical microbiology reviews one  nine
no .
three
( two  zero  zero  six  )  four  four  nine – four  nine  zero . three .
n . r .
salama et al .
“
life in the human stomach  persistence strategies of the bacterial pathogen helicobacter pylorus .
"
nature reviews microbiology one  one
( two  zero  one  three  )  three  eight  five – three  nine  nine .
six  six  eight chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five one  five  .  two
how pathogens cause disease learning objectives

summarize koch 's postulate and molecular koch 's postulate , respectively , and explain - pron - significance and limitation 
explain the concept of pathogenicity ( virulence ) in term of infectious and lethal dose  distinguish between primary and opportunistic pathogen and identify specific example of each  summarize the stage of pathogenesis 
explain the role of portal of entry and exit in the transmission of disease and identify specific example of these portal for most infectious disease , the ability to accurately identify the causative pathogen be a critical step in find or prescribe effective treatment .
today 's physician , patient , and researcher owe a sizable debt to the physician robert koch ( one  eight  four  three – one  nine  one  zero ) , who devise a systematic approach for confirm causative relationship between disease and specific pathogen .
koch 's postulates
in one  eight  eight  four , koch publish four postulate ( table one  five  .  three ) that summarize - pron - method for determine whether a particular microorganism be the cause of a particular disease .
each of koch 's postulate represent a criterion that must be meet before a disease can be positively link with a pathogen .
in order to determine whether the criterion be meet , test be perform on laboratory animal and culture from healthy and diseased animal be compare ( figure one  five  .  four ) .
koch 's postulates ( one )
the suspect pathogen must be find in every case of disease and not be find in healthy individual .
( two )
the suspect pathogen can be isolate and grow in pure culture .
( three )
a healthy test subject infect with the suspect pathogen must develop the same sign and symptom of disease as see in postulate one .
( four )
the pathogen must be re - isolate from the new host and must be identical to the pathogen from postulate two .
table one  five  .  three chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  six  nine figure one  five  .  four
the step for confirm that a pathogen be the cause of a particular disease use koch 's postulate .
in many way , koch 's postulate be still central to - pron - current understanding of the cause of disease .
however , advance in microbiology have reveal some important limitation in koch 's criterion .
koch make several assumption that - pron - now know be untrue in many case .
the first relate to postulate one , which assume that pathogen be only find in disease , not healthy , individual .
this be not true for many pathogen .
for example , h . pylorus , describe earlier in this chapter as a pathogen cause chronic gastritis , be also part of the normal microbiota of the stomach in many healthy human who never develop gastritis .
- pron - be estimate that upwards of five  zero % of the human population acquire h . pylorus early in life , with most maintain - pron - as part of the normal microbiota for the rest of - pron - life without ever develop disease .
koch 's second faulty assumption be that all healthy test subject be equally susceptible to disease .
- pron - now know that individual be not equally susceptible to disease .
individual be unique in term of - pron - microbiota and the state of - pron - immune system at any give time .
the makeup of the resident microbiota can influence an individual 's susceptibility to an infection .
member of the normal microbiota play an important role in immunity by inhibit the growth of transient pathogen .
in some case , the microbiota may prevent a pathogen from establish an infection  in other , - pron - may not prevent an infection altogether but may influence the severity or type of sign and symptom .
as a result , two individual with the same disease may not always present with the same sign and symptom .
in addition , some individual have strong immune system than other .
individual with immune system weaken by age or an unrelated illness be much more susceptible to certain infection than individual with strong immune system .
koch also assume that all pathogen be microorganism that can be grow in pure culture ( postulate two ) and that animal could serve as reliable model for human disease .
however , - pron - now know that not all pathogen can be grow in pure culture , and many human disease can not be reliably replicate in animal host .
virus and certain six  seven  zero chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five bacteria , include rickettsia and chlamydia , be obligate intracellular pathogen that can grow only when inside a host cell .
if a microbe can not be culture , a researcher can not move past postulate two .
likewise , without a suitable nonhuman host , a researcher can not evaluate postulate two without deliberately infect human , which present obvious ethical concern .
aids be an example of such a disease because the human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) only cause disease in human .

briefly summarize the limitation of koch 's postulate .
molecular koch 's postulates
in one  nine  eight  eight , stanley falkow ( one  nine  three  four – ) propose a revise form of koch 's postulate know as molecular koch 's postulate .
these be list in the left column of table one  five  .  four .
the premise for molecular koch 's postulate be not in the ability to isolate a particular pathogen but rather to identify a gene that may cause the organism to be pathogenic .
falkow 's modification to koch 's original postulate explain not only infection cause by intracellular pathogen but also the existence of pathogenic strain of organism that be usually nonpathogenic .
for example , the predominant form of the bacterium escherichia coli be a member of the normal microbiota of the human intestine and be generally consider harmless .
however , there be pathogenic strain of e . coli such as enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec ) and enterohemorrhagic e . coli ( o one  five  seven  h seven ) ( ehec ) .
- pron - now know etec and ehec exist because of the acquisition of new gene by the once - harmless e . coli , which , in the form of these pathogenic strain , be now capable of produce toxin and cause illness .
the pathogenic form result from minor genetic change .
the right - side column of table one  five  .  four illustrate how molecular koch 's postulate can be apply to identify ehec as a pathogenic bacterium .
molecular koch 's postulates apply to ehec molecular koch 's postulates application to ehec ( one )
the phenotype ( sign or symptom of disease ) should be associate only with pathogenic strain of a species .
ehec cause intestinal inflammation and diarrhea , whereas nonpathogenic strain of e . coli do not .
( two ) inactivation of the suspect gene ( s ) associate with pathogenicity should result in a measurable loss of pathogenicity .
one of the gene in ehec encode for shiga toxin , a bacterial toxin ( poison ) that inhibit protein synthesis .
inactivate this gene reduce the bacteria 's ability to cause disease .
( three )
reversion of the inactive gene should restore the disease phenotype .
by add the gene that encode the toxin back into the genome ( e . g . , with a phage or plasmid ) , ehec 's ability to cause disease be restore .
table one  five  .  four
as with koch 's original postulate , the molecular koch 's postulate have limitation .
for example , genetic manipulation of some pathogen be not possible use current method of molecular genetic .
in a similar vein , some disease do not have suitable animal model , which limit the utility of both the original and molecular postulate .

explain the difference between koch 's original postulate and the molecular koch 's postulate .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  seven  one pathogenicity and virulence
the ability of a microbial agent to cause disease be call pathogenicity , and the degree to which an organism be pathogenic be call virulence .
virulence be a continuum .
on one end of the spectrum be organism that be avirulent ( not harmful ) and on the other be organism that be highly virulent .
highly virulent pathogen will almost always lead to a disease state when introduce to the body , and some may even cause multi - organ and body system failure in healthy individual .
less virulent pathogen may cause an initial infection , but may not always cause severe illness .
pathogen with low virulence would more likely result in mild sign and symptom of disease , such as low - grade fever , headache , or muscle ache .
some individual may even be asymptomatic .
an example of a highly virulent microorganism be bacillus anthracis , the pathogen responsible for anthrax .
b . anthracis can produce different form of disease , depend on the route of transmission ( e . g . , cutaneous injection , inhalation , ingestion ) .
the most serious form of anthrax be inhalation anthrax .
after b . anthracis spore be inhale , - pron - germinate .
an active infection develop and the bacteria release potent toxin that cause edema ( fluid buildup in tissue ) , hypoxia ( a condition prevent oxygen from reach tissue ) , and necrosis ( cell death and inflammation ) .
sign and symptom of inhalation anthrax include high fever , difficulty breathing , vomit and cough up blood , and severe chest pain suggestive of a heart attack .
with inhalation anthrax , the toxin and bacteria enter the bloodstream , which can lead to multi - organ failure and death of the patient .
if a gene ( or gene ) involve in pathogenesis be inactivate , the bacteria become less virulent or nonpathogenic .
virulence of a pathogen can be quantify use control experiment with laboratory animal .
two important indicator of virulence be the median infectious dose ( id five  zero ) and the median lethal dose ( ld five  zero ) , both of which be typically determine experimentally use animal model .
the id five  zero be the number of pathogen cell or virion require to cause active infection in five  zero % of inoculated animal .
the ld five  zero be the number of pathogenic cell , virion , or amount of toxin require to kill five  zero % of infected animal .
to calculate these value , each group of animal be inoculate with one of a range of know number of pathogen cell or virion .
in graph like the one show in figure one  five  .  five , the percentage of animal that have be infect ( for id five  zero ) or kill ( for ld five  zero ) be plot against the concentration of pathogen inoculate .
figure one  five  .  five represent datum graph from a hypothetical experiment measure the ld five  zero of a pathogen .
interpretation of the datum from this graph indicate that the ld five  zero of the pathogen for the test animal be one  zero  four pathogen cell or virion ( depend upon the pathogen study ) .
figure one  five  .  five
a graph like this be use to determine ld five  zero by plot pathogen concentration against the percent of infect test animal that have die .
in this example , the ld five  zero = one  zero  four pathogenic particle .
six  seven  two chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five table one  five  .  five list select foodborne pathogen and - pron - id five  zero value in human ( as determine from epidemiologic datum and study on human volunteer ) .
keep in mind that these be median value .
the actual infective dose for an individual can vary widely , depend on factor such as route of entry  the age , health , and immune status of the host  and environmental and pathogen - specific factor such as susceptibility to the acidic ph of the stomach .
- pron - be also important to note that a pathogen 's infective dose do not necessarily correlate with disease severity .
for example , just a single cell of salmonella enterica serotype typhimurium can result in an active infection .
the resultant disease , salmonella gastroenteritis or salmonellosis , can cause nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea , but have a mortality rate of less than one % in healthy adult .
in contrast , s . enterica serotype typhi have a much high id five  zero , typically require as many as one  ,  zero  zero  zero cell to produce infection .
however , this serotype cause typhoid fever , a much more systemic and severe disease that have a mortality rate as high as one  zero % in untreated individual .
id five  zero for selected foodborne diseases[ four ]
pathogen id five  zero
viruses hepatitis a virus
one  zero – one  zero  zero
norovirus one – one  zero rotavirus one  zero – one  zero  zero bacteria escherichia coli , enterohemorrhagic ( ehec , serotype o one  five  seven )
one  zero – one  zero  zero e . coli , enteroinvasive ( eiec )
two  zero  zero – five  ,  zero  zero  zero e . coli , enteropathogenic ( epec )
one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero e . coli , enterotoxigenic ( etec ) one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero
salmonella enterica serovar typhi < one  ,  zero  zero  zero s . enterica serovar
typhimurium ≥ one
shigella dysenteriae one  zero – two  zero  zero vibrio cholerae ( serotype o one  three  nine , o one ) one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero v . parahemolyticus one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero
protozoa giardia lamblia one cryptosporidium
parvum
one  zero – one  zero  zero table one  five  .  five 
what be the difference between a pathogen 's infective dose and lethal dose ?

which be more closely related to the severity of a disease ?
four .
food and drug administration .
“
bad bug book , foodborne pathogenic microorganisms and natural toxins .
"
two nd ed .
silver spring , md  us food and drug administration  two  zero  one  two .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity
six  seven  three primary pathogens versus opportunistic pathogens pathogens can be classify as either primary pathogen or opportunistic pathogen .
a primary pathogen can cause disease in a host regardless of the host 's resident microbiota or immune system .
an opportunistic pathogen , by contrast , can only cause disease in situation that compromise the host 's defense , such as the body 's protective barrier , immune system , or normal microbiota .
individual susceptible to opportunistic infection include the very young , the elderly , woman who be pregnant , patient undergo chemotherapy , people with immunodeficiency ( such as acquire immunodeficiency syndrome [ aids ] ) , patient who be recover from surgery , and those who have have a breach of protective barrier ( such as a severe wound or burn ) .
an example of a primary pathogen be enterohemorrhagic e . coli ( ehec ) , which produce a virulence factor know as shiga toxin .
this toxin inhibit protein synthesis , lead to severe and bloody diarrhea , inflammation , and renal failure , even in patient with healthy immune system .
staphylococcus epidermidis , on the other hand , be an opportunistic pathogen that be among the most frequent cause of nosocomial disease . [ five ] s . epidermidis be a member of the normal microbiota of the skin , where - pron - be generally avirulent .
however , in hospital , - pron - can also grow in biofilm that form on catheter , implant , or other device that be insert into the body during surgical procedure .
once inside the body , s . epidermidis can cause serious infection such as endocarditis , and - pron - produce virulence factor that promote the persistence of such infection .
other member of the normal microbiota can also cause opportunistic infection under certain condition .
this often occur when microbe that reside harmlessly in one body location end up in a different body system , where - pron - cause disease .
for example , e . coli normally find in the large intestine can cause a urinary tract infection if - pron - enter the bladder .
this be the lead cause of urinary tract infection among woman .
member of the normal microbiota may also cause disease when a shift in the environment of the body lead to overgrowth of a particular microorganism .
for example , the yeast candida be part of the normal microbiota of the skin , mouth , intestine , and vagina , but - pron - population be keep in check by other organism of the microbiota .
if an individual be take antibacterial medication , however , bacteria that would normally inhibit the growth of candida can be kill off , lead to a sudden growth in the population of candida , which be not affect by antibacterial medication because - pron - be a fungus .
an overgrowth of candida can manifest as oral thrush ( growth on mouth , throat , and tongue ) , a vaginal yeast infection , or cutaneous candidiasis .
other scenario can also provide opportunity for candida infection .
untreated diabete can result in a high concentration of glucose in the saliva , which provide an optimal environment for the growth of candida , result in thrush .
immunodeficiency such as those see in patient with hiv , aids , and cancer also lead to high incidence of thrush .
vaginal yeast infection can result from decrease in estrogen level during the menstruation or menopause .
the amount of glycogen available to lactobacilli in the vagina be control by level of estrogen  when estrogen level be low , lactobacilli produce less lactic acid .
the resultant increase in vaginal ph allow overgrowth of candida in the vagina .

explain the difference between a primary pathogen and an opportunistic pathogen .

describe some condition under which an opportunistic infection can occur .
stage of pathogenesis to cause disease , a pathogen must successfully achieve four step or stage of pathogenesis  exposure ( contact ) , adhesion ( colonization ) , invasion , and infection .
the pathogen must be able to gain entry to the host , travel to the location where - pron - can establish an infection , evade or overcome the host 's immune response , and cause damage ( i . e . , disease ) to the host .
in many case , the cycle be complete when the pathogen exit the host and be transmit to a new host .
five .
m . otto .
“
staphylococcus epidermidis - -
the ' accidental ' pathogen .
"
nature reviews microbiology seven
no .
eight ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  five  five  five – five  six  seven .
six  seven  four chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five exposure
an encounter with a potential pathogen be know as exposure or contact .
the food - pron - eat and the object - pron - handle be all way that - pron - can come into contact with potential pathogen .
yet , not all contact result in infection and disease .
for a pathogen to cause disease , - pron - need to be able to gain access into host tissue .
an anatomic site through which pathogen can pass into host tissue be call a portal of entry .
these be location where the host cell be in direct contact with the external environment .
major portal of entry be identify in figure one  five  .  six and include the skin , mucous membrane , and parenteral route .
figure one  five  .  six show be different portal of entry where pathogen can gain access into the body .
with the exception of the placenta , many of these location be directly expose to the external environment .
mucosal surface be the most important portal of entry for microbe  these include the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract , the gastrointestinal tract , and the genitourinary tract .
although most mucosal surface be in the interior of the body , some be contiguous with the external skin at various body opening , include the eye , nose , mouth , urethra , and anus .
most pathogen be suit to a particular portal of entry .
a pathogen 's portal specificity be determine by the organism 's environmental adaption and by the enzyme and toxin - pron - secrete .
the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract be particularly vulnerable portal of entry because particle that include microorganism be constantly inhale or ingest , respectively .
pathogen can also enter through a breach in the protective barrier of the skin and mucous membrane .
pathogen that enter the body in this way be say to enter by the parenteral route .
for example , the skin be a good natural barrier chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  seven  five to pathogen , but break in the skin ( e . g . , wound , insect bite , animal bite , needle prick ) can provide a parenteral portal of entry for microorganism .
in pregnant woman , the placenta normally prevent microorganism from pass from the mother to the fetus .
however , a few pathogen be capable of cross the blood - placental barrier .
the gram - positive bacterium listeria monocytogene , which cause the foodborne disease listeriosis , be one example that pose a serious risk to the fetus and can sometimes lead to spontaneous abortion .
other pathogen that can pass the placental barrier to infect the fetus be know collectively by the acronym torch ( table one  five  .  six ) .
transmission of infectious disease from mother to baby be also a concern at the time of birth when the baby pass through the birth canal .
baby whose mother have active chlamydia or gonorrhea infection may be expose to the causative pathogen in the vagina , which can result in eye infection that lead to blindness .
to prevent this , - pron - be standard practice to administer antibiotic drop to infant ' eye shortly after birth .
pathogens capable of cross the placental barrier ( torch infections )
disease pathogen t toxoplasmosis toxoplasma gondii ( protozoan ) o[ six ]
syphilis chickenpox hepatitis b hiv fifth disease ( erythema infectiosum )
treponema pallidum ( bacterium )
varicella - zoster virus ( human herpesvirus three ) hepatitis b virus ( hepadnavirus )
retrovirus parvovirus b one  nine r rubella ( german measle )
togavirus c cytomegalovirus human herpesvirus
five h herpes
herpes simplex virus ( hsv ) one and two table one  five  .  six part two
at the clinic , a physician take down michael 's medical history and ask about - pron - activity and diet over the past week .
upon learn that michael become sick the day after the party , the physician order a blood test to check for pathogen associate with foodborne disease .
after test confirm that presence of a gram - positive rod in michael 's blood , - pron - be give an injection of a broad - spectrum antibiotic and send to a nearby hospital , where - pron - be admit as a patient .
there - pron - be to receive additional intravenous antibiotic therapy and fluid .

be this bacterium in michael 's blood part of normal microbiota ?

what portal of entry do the bacteria use to cause this infection ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
adhesion
follow the initial exposure , the pathogen adhere at the portal of entry .
the term adhesion refer to the capability of pathogenic microbe to attach to the cell of the body use adhesion factor , and different pathogen use various mechanism to adhere to the cell of host tissue .
molecules ( either protein or carbohydrate ) call adhesin be find on the surface of certain pathogen and bind to clinical focus six .
the o in torch stand for “ other .
” six  seven  six
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five specific receptor ( glycoprotein ) on host cell .
adhesin be present on the fimbriae and flagella of bacteria , the cilia of protozoa , and the capsid or membrane of virus .
protozoans can also use hook and barb for adhesion  spike protein on virus also enhance viral adhesion .
the production of glycocalyce ( slime layer and capsule ) ( figure one  five  .  seven ) , with - pron - high sugar and protein content , can also allow certain bacterial pathogen to attach to cell .
biofilm growth can also act as an adhesion factor .
a biofilm be a community of bacteria that produce a glycocalyx , know as extrapolymeric substance ( eps ) , that allow the biofilm to attach to a surface .
persistent pseudomonas aeruginosa infection be common in patient suffer from cystic fibrosis , burn wound , and middle - ear infection ( otitis medium ) because p . aeruginosa produce a biofilm .
the eps allow the bacteria to adhere to the host cell and make - pron - hard for the host to physically remove the pathogen .
the eps not only allow for attachment but provide protection against the immune system and antibiotic treatment , prevent antibiotic from reach the bacterial cell within the biofilm .
in addition , not all bacteria in a biofilm be rapidly grow  some be in stationary phase .
since antibiotic be most effective against rapidly grow bacteria , portion of bacteria in a biofilm be protect against antibiotics . [ seven ] figure one  five  .  seven glycocalyx produce by bacteria in a biofilm allow the cell to adhere to host tissue and to medical device such as the catheter surface show here .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
invasion
once adhesion be successful , invasion can proceed .
invasion involve the dissemination of a pathogen throughout local tissue or the body .
pathogen may produce exoenzyme or toxin , which serve as virulence factor that allow - pron - to colonize and damage host tissue as - pron - spread deeper into the body .
pathogen may also produce virulence factor that protect - pron - against immune system defense .
a pathogen 's specific virulence factor determine the degree of tissue damage that occur .
figure one  five  .  eight show the invasion of h . pylorus into the tissue of the stomach , cause damage as - pron - progress .
seven .
d . davies .
“
understanding biofilm resistance to antibacterial agents .
"
nature reviews drug discovery two
( two  zero  zero  three  )  one  one  four – one  two  two .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  seven  seven figure one  five  .  eight h . pylorus be able to invade the lining of the stomach by produce virulence factor that enable - pron - pass through the mucin layer cover epithelial cell .
( credit  modification of work by zina deretsky , national science foundation )
intracellular pathogen achieve invasion by enter the host 's cell and reproducing .
some be obligate intracellular pathogen ( mean - pron - can only reproduce inside of host cell ) and other be facultative intracellular pathogen ( mean - pron - can reproduce either inside or outside of host cell ) .
by enter the host cell , intracellular pathogen be able to evade some mechanism of the immune system while also exploit the nutrient in the host cell .
entry to a cell can occur by endocytosis .
for most kind of host cell , pathogen use one of two different mechanism for endocytosis and entry .
one mechanism rely on effector protein secrete by the pathogen  these effector protein trigger entry into the host cell .
this be the method that salmonella and shigella use when invade intestinal epithelial cell .
when these pathogen come in contact with epithelial cell in the intestine , - pron - secrete effector molecule that cause protrusion of membrane ruffle that bring the bacterial cell in .
this process be call membrane ruffling .
the second mechanism rely on surface protein express on the pathogen that bind to receptor on the host cell , result in entry .
for example , yersinia pseudotuberculosis produce a surface protein know as invasin that bind to beta -  one integrin express on the surface of host cell .
some host cell , such as white blood cell and other phagocyte of the immune system , actively endocytose pathogen in a process call phagocytosis .
although phagocytosis allow the pathogen to gain entry to the host cell , in most case , the host cell kill and degrade the pathogen by use digestive enzyme .
normally , when a pathogen be ingest by a phagocyte , - pron - be enclose within a phagosome in the cytoplasm  the phagosome fuse with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome , where digestive enzyme kill the pathogen ( see pathogen recognition and phagocytosis ) .
however , some intracellular pathogen have the ability to survive and multiply within phagocyte .
example include listeria monocytogene and shigella  these bacteria produce protein that lyse the phagosome before - pron - fuse with the lysosome , allow the bacteria to escape into the phagocyte 's cytoplasm where - pron - can multiply .
bacteria such as mycobacterium tuberculosis , legionella pneumophila , and salmonella specie use a slightly different mechanism to evade be digest by the phagocyte .
these bacteria prevent the fusion of the phagosome with the lysosome , thus remain alive and divide within the phagosome .
infection
follow invasion , successful multiplication of the pathogen lead to infection .
infection can be describe as local , focal , or systemic , depend on the extent of the infection .
a local infection be confine to a small area of the body , typically near the portal of entry .
for example , a hair follicle infect by staphylococcus aureus infection may result in a boil around the site of infection , but the bacterium be largely contain to this small location .
other example of local infection that involve more extensive tissue involvement include urinary tract infection confine to the bladder six  seven  eight chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five or pneumonia confine to the lung .
in a focal infection , a localized pathogen , or the toxin - pron - produce , can spread to a secondary location .
for example , a dental hygienist nick the gum with a sharp tool can lead to a local infection in the gum by streptococcus bacteria of the normal oral microbiota .
these streptococcus spp . may then gain access to the bloodstream and make - pron - way to other location in the body , result in a secondary infection .
when an infection become disseminate throughout the body , - pron - call - pron - a systemic infection .
for example , infection by the varicella - zoster virus typically gain entry through a mucous membrane of the upper respiratory system .
- pron - then spread throughout the body , result in the classic red skin lesion associate with chickenpox .
since these lesion be not site of initial infection , - pron - be sign of a systemic infection .
sometimes a primary infection , the initial infection cause by one pathogen , can lead to a secondary infection by another pathogen .
for example , the immune system of a patient with a primary infection by hiv become compromise , make the patient more susceptible to secondary disease like oral thrush and other cause by opportunistic pathogen .
similarly , a primary infection by influenzavirus damage and decrease the defense mechanism of the lung , make patient more susceptible to a secondary pneumonia by a bacterial pathogen like haemophilus influenzae or streptococcus pneumoniae .
some secondary infection can even develop as a result of treatment for a primary infection .
antibiotic therapy target the primary pathogen can cause collateral damage to the normal microbiota , create an opening for opportunistic pathogen ( see case in point  a secondary yeast infection ) .
a secondary yeast infection anita , a three  six  - year - old mother of three , go to an urgent care center complaining of pelvic pressure , frequent and painful urination , abdominal cramp , and occasional blood - tinge urine .
suspect a urinary tract infection ( uti ) , the physician request a urine sample and send - pron - to the lab for a urinalysis .
since - pron - will take approximately two  four hour to get the result of the culturing , the physician immediately start anita on the antibiotic ciprofloxacin .
the next day , the microbiology lab confirm the presence of e . coli in anita 's urine , which be consistent with the presumptive diagnosis .
however , the antimicrobial susceptibility test indicate that ciprofloxacin would not effectively treat anita 's uti , so the physician prescribe a different antibiotic .
after take - pron - antibiotic for one week , anita return to the clinic complain that the prescription be not work .
although the painful urination have subside , - pron - be now experience vaginal itching , burning , and discharge .
after a brief examination , the physician explain to anita that the antibiotic be likely successful in kill the e . coli responsible for - pron - uti  however , in the process , - pron - also wipe out many of the " good " bacteria in anita 's normal microbiota .
the new symptom that anita have report be consistent with a secondary yeast infection by candida albican , an opportunistic fungus that normally reside in the vagina but be inhibit by the bacteria that normally reside in the same environment .
to confirm this diagnosis , a microscope slide of a direct vaginal smear be prepare from the discharge to check for the presence of yeast .
a sample of the discharge accompany this slide to the microbiology lab to determine if there have be an increase in the population of yeast cause vaginitis .
after the microbiology lab confirm the diagnosis , the physician prescribe an antifungal drug for anita to use to eliminate - pron - secondary yeast infection .

why be candida not kill by the antibiotic prescribe for the uti ?

list three condition that could lead to a secondary infection .
case in point chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  seven  nine transmission of disease
for a pathogen to persist , - pron - must put - pron - in a position to be transmit to a new host , leave the infected host through a portal of exit ( figure one  five  .  nine ) .
as with portal of entry , many pathogen be adapt to use a particular portal of exit .
similar to portal of entry , the most common portal of exit include the skin and the respiratory , urogenital , and gastrointestinal tract .
cough and sneezing can expel pathogen from the respiratory tract .
a single sneeze can send thousand of virus particle into the air .
secretion and excretion can transport pathogen out of other portal of exit .
fece , urine , seman , vaginal secretion , tear , sweat , and shed skin cell can all serve as vehicle for a pathogen to leave the body .
pathogen that rely on insect vector for transmission exit the body in the blood extract by a bite insect .
similarly , some pathogen exit the body in blood extract by needle .
figure one  five  .  nine pathogen leave the body of an infected host through various portal of exit to infect new host .
six  eight  zero chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five one  five  .  three virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens learning objectives

explain how virulence factor contribute to sign and symptom of infectious disease 
differentiate between endotoxin and exotoxin  describe and differentiate between various type of exotoxin 
describe the mechanism virus use for adhesion and antigenic variation in the previous section , - pron - explain that some pathogen be more virulent than other .
this be due to the unique virulence factor produce by individual pathogen , which determine the extent and severity of disease - pron - may cause .
a pathogen 's virulence factor be encode by gene that can be identify use molecular koch 's postulate .
when gene encode virulence factor be inactivate , virulence in the pathogen be diminish .
in this section , - pron - examine various type and specific example of virulence factor and how - pron - contribute to each step of pathogenesis .
virulence factors for adhesion
as discuss in the previous section , the first two step in pathogenesis be exposure and adhesion .
recall that an adhesin be a protein or glycoprotein find on the surface of a pathogen that attach to receptor on the host cell .
adhesin be find on bacterial , viral , fungal , and protozoan pathogen .
one example of a bacterial adhesin be type one fimbrial adhesin , a molecule find on the tip of fimbriae of enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec ) .
recall that fimbriae be hairlike protein bristle on the cell surface .
type one fimbrial adhesin allow the fimbriae of etec cell to attach to the mannose glycan express on intestinal epithelial cell .
table one  five  .  seven list common adhesin find in some of the pathogen - pron - have discuss or will be see later in this chapter .
some bacterial adhesins and - pron - host attachment sites pathogen disease adhesin attachment site streptococcus pyogene strep throat protein f respiratory epithelial cell streptococcus mutan
dental carie adhesin p one teeth neisseria gonorrhoeae gonorrhea type iv pili urethral epithelial cell enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec )
traveler 's diarrhea type one fimbriae intestinal epithelial cell vibrio cholerae
cholera n - methylphenylalanine pili intestinal epithelial cell table
one  five  .  seven part three
the presence of bacteria in michael 's blood be a sign of infection , since blood be normally sterile .
there be no indication that the bacteria enter the blood through an injury .
instead , - pron - appear the portal of entry be the gastrointestinal route .
base on michael 's symptom , the result of - pron - blood test , and the fact that michael be the only one in the family to partake of the hot dog , the physician suspect that michael be suffer from clinical focus chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  eight  one a case of listeriosis .
listeria monocytogene , the facultative intracellular pathogen that cause listeriosis , be a common contaminant in ready - to - eat food such as lunch meat and dairy product .
once ingested , these bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cell and translocate to the liver , where - pron - grow inside hepatic cell .
listeriosis be fatal in about one in five normal healthy people , and mortality rate be slightly high in patient with pre - existing condition that weaken the immune response .
a cluster of virulence gene encode on a pathogenicity island be responsible for the pathogenicity of l . monocytogene .
these gene be regulate by a transcriptional factor know as peptide chain release factor one ( prfa ) .
one of the gene regulate by prfa be hyl , which encode a toxin know as listeriolysin o ( llo ) , which allow the bacterium to escape vacuole upon entry into a host cell .
a second gene regulate by prfa be acta , which encode for a surface protein know as actin assembly - induce protein ( acta ) .
acta be express on the surface of listeria and polymerize host actin .
this enable the bacterium to produce actin tail , move around the cell 's cytoplasm , and spread from cell to cell without exit into the extracellular compartment .
michael 's condition have begin to worsen .
- pron - be now experience a stiff neck and hemiparesis ( weakness of one side of the body ) .
concerned that the infection be spread , the physician decide to conduct additional test to determine what be cause these new symptom .

what kind of pathogen cause listeriosis , and what virulence factor contribute to the sign and symptom michael be experience ?

be - pron - likely that the infection will spread from michael 's blood ?
if so , how may this explain - pron - new symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
bacterial exoenzymes and toxins as virulence factors
after exposure and adhesion , the next step in pathogenesis be invasion , which can involve enzyme and toxin .
many pathogen achieve invasion by enter the bloodstream , an effective mean of dissemination because blood vessel pass close to every cell in the body .
the downside of this mechanism of dispersal be that the blood also include numerous element of the immune system .
various term end in –emia be use to describe the presence of pathogen in the bloodstream .
the presence of bacteria in blood be call bacteremia .
bacteremia involve pyogen ( pus - form bacteria ) be call pyemia .
when virus be find in the blood , - pron - be call viremia .
the term toxemia describe the condition when toxin be find in the blood .
if bacteria be both present and multiply in the blood , this condition be call septicemia .
patient with septicemia be describe as septic , which can lead to shock , a life - threaten decrease in blood pressure ( systolic pressure < nine  zero mm hg ) that prevent cell and organ from receive enough oxygen and nutrient .
some bacteria can cause shock through the release of toxin ( virulence factor that can cause tissue damage ) and lead to low blood pressure .
gram - negative bacteria be engulf by immune system phagocyte , which then release tumor necrosis factor , a molecule involve in inflammation and fever .
tumor necrosis factor bind to blood capillary to increase - pron - permeability , allow fluid to pass out of blood vessel and into tissue , cause swelling , or edema ( figure one  five  .  one  zero ) .
with high concentration of tumor necrosis factor , the inflammatory reaction be severe and enough fluid be lose from the circulatory system that blood pressure decrease to dangerously low level .
this can have dire consequence because the heart , lung , and kidney rely on normal blood pressure for proper function  thus , multiorgan failure , shock , and death can occur .
six  eight  two chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  five  .  one  zero
this patient have edema in the tissue of the right hand .
such swelling can occur when bacteria cause the release of pro - inflammatory molecule from immune cell and these molecule cause an increase permeability of blood vessel , allow fluid to escape the bloodstream and enter tissue .
exoenzyme
some pathogen produce extracellular enzyme , or exoenzyme , that enable - pron - to invade host cell and deep tissue .
exoenzyme have a wide variety of target .
some general class of exoenzyme and associate pathogen be list in table one  five  .  eight .
each of these exoenzymes function in the context of a particular tissue structure to facilitate invasion or support - pron - own growth and defend against the immune system .
for example , hyaluronidase s , an enzyme produce by pathogen like staphylococcus aureus , streptococcus pyogene , and clostridium perfringen , degrade the glycoside hyaluronan ( hyaluronic acid ) , which act as an intercellular cement between adjacent cell in connective tissue ( figure one  five  .  one  one ) .
this allow the pathogen to pass through the tissue layer at the portal of entry and disseminate elsewhere in the body ( figure one  five  .  one  one ) .
some classes of exoenzymes and - pron - targets class example function glycohydrolase hyaluronidase s in staphylococcus aureus degrade hyaluronic acid that cement cell together to promote spread through tissue nucleases dnase produce by s . aureus degrades dna release by die cell ( bacteria and host cell ) that can trap the bacteria , thus promote spread phospholipases phospholipase c of bacillus anthracis degrade phospholipid bilayer of host cell , cause cellular lysis , and degrade membrane of phagosome to enable escape into the cytoplasm proteases collagenase in clostridium perfringen degrade collagen in connective tissue to promote spread
table one  five  .  eight chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  eight  three figure one  five  .  one  one
( a ) hyaluronan be a polymer find in the layer of epidermis that connect adjacent cell .
( b )
hyaluronidase produce by bacteria degrade this adhesive polymer in the extracellular matrix , allow passage between cell that would otherwise be block .
pathogen - produce nuclease , such as dnase produce by s . aureus , degrade extracellular dna as a means of escape and spread through tissue .
as bacterial and host cell die at the site of infection , - pron - lyse and release - pron - intracellular content .
the dna chromosome be the large of the intracellular molecule , and mass of extracellular dna can trap bacteria and prevent - pron - spread .
s . aureus produce a dnase to degrade the mesh of extracellular dna so - pron - can escape and spread to adjacent tissue .
this strategy be also use by s . aureus and other pathogen to degrade and escape webs of extracellular dna produce by immune system phagocyte to trap the bacteria .
enzyme that degrade the phospholipid of cell membrane be call phospholipase .
- pron - action be specific in regard to the type of phospholipid - pron - act upon and where - pron - enzymatically cleave the molecule .
the pathogen responsible for anthrax , b . anthracis , produce phospholipase c . when b . anthracis be ingest by phagocytic cell of the immune system , phospholipase c degrade the membrane of the phagosome before - pron - can fuse with the lysosome , allow the pathogen to escape into the cytoplasm and multiply .
phospholipase can also target the membrane that enclose the phagosome within phagocytic cell .
as describe earlier in this chapter , this be the mechanism use by intracellular pathogen such as l . monocytogene and rickettsia to escape the phagosome and multiply within the cytoplasm of phagocytic cell .
the role of phospholipase in bacterial virulence be not restrict to phagosomal escape .
many pathogen produce phospholipase that act to degrade cell membrane and cause lysis of target cell .
these phospholipase be involve in lysis of red blood cell , white blood cell , and tissue cell .
bacterial pathogen also produce various protein - digest enzyme , or protease .
protease can be classify accord to - pron - substrate target ( e . g . , serine protease target protein with the amino acid serine ) or if - pron - contain metal in - pron - active site ( e . g . , zinc metalloprotease contain a zinc ion , which be necessary for enzymatic activity ) .
one example of a protease that contain a metal ion be the exoenzyme collagenase .
collagenase digest collagen , the dominant protein in connective tissue .
collagen can be find in the extracellular matrix , especially near mucosal membrane , blood vessel , nerve , and in the layer of the skin .
similar to hyaluronidase , collagenase allow the pathogen to penetrate and spread through the host tissue by digest this connective tissue protein .
the collagenase produce by the gram - positive bacterium clostridium perfringen , for example , allow the bacterium to make - pron - way through the tissue layer and subsequently enter and multiply in the blood ( septicemia ) .
c . perfringen then use toxin and a phospholipase to cause cellular lysis and necrosis .
once the host cell have die , the bacterium produce gas by ferment the muscle carbohydrate .
the widespread necrosis of tissue and accompany gas be characteristic of the condition know as gas gangrene ( figure one  five  .  one  two ) .
six  eight  four chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  five  .  one  two
the illustration depict a blood vessel with a single layer of endothelial cell surround the luman and dense connective tissue ( show in red ) surround the endothelial cell layer .
collagenase produce by c . perfringen degrade the collagen between the endothelial cell , allow the bacteria to enter the bloodstream .
( credit illustration  modification of work by bruce blaus  credit micrograph 
micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
two type of cell death be apoptosis and necrosis .
visit this website ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two celldeath ) to learn more about the difference between these mechanism of cell death and - pron - cause .
toxin
in addition to exoenzyme , certain pathogen be able to produce toxin , biological poison that assist in - pron - ability to invade and cause damage to tissue .
the ability of a pathogen to produce toxin to cause damage to host cell be call toxigenicity .
toxin can be categorize as endotoxin or exotoxin .
the lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) find on the outer membrane of gram - negative bacteria be call endotoxin ( figure one  five  .  one  three ) .
during infection and disease , gram - negative bacterial pathogen release endotoxin either when the cell die , result in the disintegration of the membrane , or when the bacterium undergo binary fission .
the lipid component of endotoxin , lipid a , be responsible for the toxic property of the lps molecule .
lipid a be relatively conserve across different genera of gram - negative bacteria  therefore , the toxic property of lipid a be similar regardless of the gram - negative pathogen .
in a manner similar to that of tumor necrosis factor , lipid a trigger the immune system 's inflammatory response ( see inflammation and fever ) .
if the concentration of endotoxin in the body be low , the inflammatory response may provide the host an effective defense against infection  on the other hand , high concentration of endotoxin in the blood can cause an excessive inflammatory response , lead to a severe drop in blood pressure , multi - organ failure , and death .
link to learning chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity
six  eight  five figure one  five  .  one  three lipopolysaccharide be compose of lipid a , a core glycolipid , and an o - specific polysaccharide side chain .
lipid a be the toxic component that promote inflammation and fever .
a classic method of detect endotoxin be by use the limulus amebocyte lysate ( lal ) test .
in this procedure , the blood cell ( amebocyte ) of the horseshoe crab ( limulus polyphemus ) be mixed with a patient 's serum .
the amebocyte will react to the presence of any endotoxin .
this reaction can be observe either chromogenically ( color ) or by look for coagulation ( clot reaction ) to occur within the serum .
an alternative method that have be use be an enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisa ) that use antibody to detect the presence of endotoxin .
unlike the toxic lipid a of endotoxin , exotoxin be protein molecule that be produce by a wide variety of live pathogenic bacteria .
although some gram - negative pathogen produce exotoxin , the majority be produce by grampositive pathogen .
exotoxin differ from endotoxin in several other key characteristic , summarize in table one  five  .  nine .
in contrast to endotoxin , which stimulate a general systemic inflammatory response when release , exotoxin be much more specific in - pron - action and the cell - pron - interact with .
each exotoxin target specific receptor on specific cell and damage those cell through unique molecular mechanism .
endotoxin remain stable at high temperature , and require heating at one  two  one ° c ( two  five  zero ° f ) for four  five minute to inactivate .
by contrast , most exotoxin be heat labile because of - pron - protein structure , and many be denature ( inactivate ) at temperature above four  one ° c ( one  zero  six ° f ) .
as discuss earlier , endotoxin can stimulate a lethal inflammatory response at very high concentration and have a measure ld five  zero of zero  .  two  four mg / kg .
by contrast , very small concentration of exotoxin can be lethal .
for example , botulinum toxin , which cause botulism , have an ld five  zero of zero  .  zero  zero  zero  zero  zero  one mg / kg ( two  four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero time more lethal than endotoxin ) .
comparison of endotoxin and exotoxin produce by
bacteria characteristic endotoxin exotoxin source gram - negative bacteria gram - positive ( primarily ) and gram - negative bacteria composition lipid a component of lipopolysaccharide protein effect on host general systemic symptom of inflammation and fever specific damage to cell dependent upon receptor - mediate targeting of cell and specific mechanism of action heat stability heat
stable most be heat labile , but some be heat stable ld five  zero high low table one  five  .  nine
the exotoxin can be group into three category base on - pron - target  intracellular targeting , membrane disrupting , and superantigen .
table one  five  .  one  zero provide example of well - characterize toxin within each of these three category .
six  eight  six chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five some common exotoxins and associated bacterial pathogens category example
pathogen mechanism and disease cholera toxin vibrio cholerae activation of adenylate cyclase in intestinal cell , cause increase level of cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( camp ) and secretion of fluid and electrolyte out of cell , cause diarrhea tetanus toxin clostridium tetani inhibits the release of inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system , cause spastic paralysis
botulinum toxin clostridium botulinum inhibits release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from neuron , result in
flaccid paralysis intracellulartargeting toxin diphtheria toxin corynebacterium diphtheriae inhibition of protein synthesis , cause cellular death streptolysin streptococcus pyogene pneumolysin streptococcus pneumoniae alpha - toxin staphylococcus aureus proteins that assemble into pore in cell membrane , disrupt - pron - function and kill the cell alpha - toxin clostridium perfringen
phospholipase c pseudomonas aeruginosa
membranedisrupting toxin beta - toxin staphylococcus aureus phospholipases that degrade cell membrane phospholipid , disrupt membrane function and kill the cell
toxic shock syndrome toxin staphylococcus aureus streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin streptococcus pyogene
superantigens streptococcal pyrogenic toxin
streptococcus pyogene stimulates excessive activation of immune system cell and release of cytokine ( chemical mediator ) from immune system cell .
life - threaten fever , inflammation , and shock be the result .
table one  five  .  one  zero
the intracellular target toxin comprise two component  a for activity and b for bind .
thus , these type of toxin be know as a - b exotoxin ( figure one  five  .  one  four ) .
the b component be responsible for the cellular specificity of the toxin and mediate the initial attachment of the toxin to specific cell surface receptor .
once the a - b toxin bind to the host cell , - pron - be bring into the cell by endocytosis and entrap in a vacuole .
the a and b subunit separate as the vacuole acidifie .
the a subunit then enter the cell cytoplasm and interfere with the specific internal cellular function that - pron - target .
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  eight  seven figure one  five  .  one  four ( a )
in a - b toxin , the b component bind to the host cell through - pron - interaction with specific cell surface receptor .
( b )
the toxin be bring in through endocytosis .
( c )
once inside the vacuole , the a component ( active component ) separate from the b component and the a component gain access to the cytoplasm .
( credit  modification of work by “ biology discussion forum” / youtube )
four unique example of a - b toxin be the diphtheria , cholera , botulinum , and tetanus toxin .
the diphtheria toxin be produce by the gram - positive bacterium corynebacterium diphtheriae , the causative agent of nasopharyngeal and cutaneous diphtheria .
after the a subunit of the diphtheria toxin separate and gain access to the cytoplasm , - pron - facilitate the transfer of adenosine diphosphate ( adp ) - ribose onto an elongation - factor protein ( ef -  two ) that be need for protein synthesis .
hence , diphtheria toxin inhibit protein synthesis in the host cell , ultimately kill the cell ( figure one  five  .  one  five ) .
figure one  five  .  one  five
the mechanism of the diphtheria toxin inhibit protein synthesis .
the a subunit inactivate elongation factor two by transfer an adp - ribose .
this stop protein elongation , inhibit protein synthesis and kill the cell .
cholera toxin be an enterotoxin produce by the gram - negative bacterium vibrio cholerae and be compose of one a subunit and five b subunit .
the mechanism of action of the cholera toxin be complex .
the b subunit bind to receptor on the intestinal epithelial cell of the small intestine .
after gain entry into the cytoplasm of the epithelial cell , the a subunit activate an intracellular g protein .
the activated g protein , in turn , lead to the activation of the enzyme adenyl cyclase , which begin to produce an increase in the concentration of cyclic amp ( a secondary messenger molecule ) .
the increased camp disrupt the normal physiology of the intestinal epithelial cell and cause six  eight  eight chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five - pron - to secrete excessive amount of fluid and electrolyte into the luman of the intestinal tract , result in
severe “ rice - water stool " diarrhea characteristic of cholera .
botulinum toxin ( also know as botox ) be a neurotoxin produce by the gram - positive bacterium clostridium botulinum .
- pron - be the most acutely toxic substance know to date .
the toxin be compose of a light a subunit and heavy protein chain b subunit .
the b subunit bind to neuron to allow botulinum toxin to enter the neuron at the neuromuscular junction .
the a subunit act as a protease , cleave protein involve in the neuron 's release of acetylcholine , a neurotransmitter molecule .
normally , neuron release acetylcholine to induce muscle fiber contraction .
the toxin 's ability to block acetylcholine release result in the inhibition of muscle contraction , lead to muscle relaxation .
this have the potential to stop breathe and cause death .
because of - pron - action , low concentration of botox be use for cosmetic and medical procedure , include the removal of wrinkle and treatment of overactive bladder .
click this link ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two pathochol ) to see an animation of how the cholera toxin function .
click this link ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two botulin ) to see an animation of how the botulinum toxin function .
another neurotoxin be tetanus toxin , which be produce by the gram - positive bacterium clostridium tetani .
this toxin also have a light a subunit and heavy protein chain b subunit .
unlike botulinum toxin , tetanus toxin bind to inhibitory interneuron , which be responsible for release of the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine and gamma - aminobutyric acid ( gaba ) .
normally , these neurotransmitter bind to neuron at the neuromuscular junction , result in the inhibition of acetylcholine release .
tetanus toxin inhibit the release of glycine and gaba from the interneuron , result in permanent muscle contraction .
the first symptom be typically stiffness of the jaw ( lockjaw ) .
violent muscle spasm in other part of the body follow , typically culminate with respiratory failure and death .
figure one  five  .  one  six show the action of both botulinum and tetanus toxin .
link to learning chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  eight  nine figure one  five  .  one  six mechanisms of botulinum and tetanus toxin .
( credit micrograph  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
membrane - disrupt toxin affect cell membrane function either by form pore or by disrupt the phospholipid bilayer in host cell membrane .
two type of membrane - disrupt exotoxin be hemolysin and leukocidin , which form pore in cell membrane , cause leakage of the cytoplasmic content and cell lysis .
these toxin be originally think to target red blood cell ( erythrocyte ) and white blood cell ( leukocyte ) , respectively , but - pron - now know - pron - can affect other cell as well .
the gram - positive bacterium streptococcus pyogene produce streptolysin , watersoluble hemolysin that bind to the cholesterol moiety in the host cell membrane to form a pore .
the two type of streptolysin , o and s , be categorize by - pron - ability to cause hemolysis in erythrocyte in the absence or presence of oxygen .
streptolysin o be not active in the presence of oxygen , whereas streptolysin s be active in the presence of oxygen .
other important pore - form membrane - disrupt toxin include alpha toxin of staphylococcus aureus and pneumolysin of streptococcus pneumoniae .
bacterial phospholipase be membrane - disrupt toxin that degrade the phospholipid bilayer of cell membrane rather than form pore .
- pron - have already discuss the phospholipase associate with b . anthracis , l . pneumophila , and rickettsia specie that enable these bacteria to effect the lysis of phagosome .
these same phospholipase be also hemolysin .
other phospholipase that function as hemolysin include the alpha toxin of clostridium perfringen , phospholipase c of p . aeruginosa , and beta toxin of staphylococcus aureus .
some strain of s . aureus also produce a leukocidin call panton - valentine leukocidin ( pvl ) .
pvl consist of two subunit , s and f .
the s component act like the b subunit of an a - b exotoxin in that - pron - bind to glycolipid on the outer plasma membrane of animal cell .
the f - component act like the a subunit of an a - b exotoxin and carry the enzymatic activity .
the toxin insert and assemble into a pore in the membrane .
gene that encode
pvl be more frequently present in s . aureus strain that cause skin infection and
pneumonia . [ eight ] pvl promote skin infection by six  nine  zero chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cause edema , erythema ( redden of the skin due to blood vessel dilation ) , and skin necrosis .
pvl have also be show to cause necrotize pneumonia .
pvl promote pro - inflammatory and cytotoxic effect on alveolar leukocyte .
this result in the release of enzyme from the leukocyte , which , in turn , cause damage to lung tissue .
the third class of exotoxin be the superantigen .
these be exotoxin that trigger an excessive , nonspecific stimulation of immune cell to secrete cytokine ( chemical messenger ) .
the excessive production of cytokine , often call a cytokine storm , elicit a strong immune and inflammatory response that can cause life - threaten high fever , low blood pressure , multi - organ failure , shock , and death .
the prototype superantigen be the toxic shock syndrome toxin of s . aureus .
most toxic shock syndrome case be associate with vaginal colonization by toxinproduce s . aureus in menstruate woman  however , colonization of other body site can also occur .
some strain of streptococcus pyogene also produce superantigen  - pron - be refer to as the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin and the streptococcal pyrogenic toxin .

describe how exoenzyme contribute to bacterial invasion .

explain the difference between exotoxin and endotoxin .

name the three class of exotoxin .
virulence factors for survival in the host and immune evasion
evading the immune system be also important to invasiveness .
bacteria use a variety of virulence factor to evade phagocytosis by cell of the immune system .
for example , many bacteria produce capsule , which be use in adhesion but also aid in immune evasion by prevent ingestion by phagocyte .
the composition of the capsule prevent immune cell from be able to adhere and then phagocytose the cell .
in addition , the capsule make the bacterial cell much large , make - pron - harder for immune cell to engulf the pathogen ( figure one  five  .  one  seven ) .
a notable capsule - produce bacterium be the gram - positive pathogen streptococcus pneumoniae , which cause pneumococcal pneumonia , meningitis , septicemia , and other respiratory tract infection .
encapsulated strain of s . pneumoniae be more virulent than nonencapsulated strain and be more likely to invade the bloodstream and cause septicemia and meningitis .
some pathogen can also produce protease to protect - pron - against phagocytosis .
as describe in adaptive specific host defenses , the human immune system produce antibody that bind to surface molecule find on specific bacteria ( e . g . , capsule , fimbriae , flagella , lps ) .
this bind initiate phagocytosis and other mechanism of antibacterial killing and clearance .
protease combat antibody - mediate killing and clearance by attack and digest the antibody molecule ( figure one  five  .  one  seven ) .
in addition to capsule and protease , some bacterial pathogen produce other virulence factor that allow - pron - to evade the immune system .
the fimbriae of certain specie of streptococcus contain m protein , which alter the surface of streptococcus and inhibit phagocytosis by block the binding of the complement molecule that assist phagocyte in ingest bacterial pathogen .
the acid - fast bacterium mycobacterium tuberculosis ( the causative agent of tuberculosis ) produce a waxy substance know as mycolic acid in - pron - cell envelope .
when - pron - be engulf by phagocyte in the lung , the protective mycolic acid coat enable the bacterium to resist some of the killing mechanism within the phagolysosome .
eight .
v . meka .
“
panton - valentine leukocidin .
"
http / / www . antimicrobe . org / h zero  four c . files / history / pvl - s - aureus . asp
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  nine  one figure one  five  .  one  seven ( a )
a micrograph of capsule around bacterial cell .
( b ) antibody normally function by bind to antigen , molecule on the surface of pathogenic bacteria .
phagocyte then bind to the antibody , initiate phagocytosis .
( c )
some bacteria also produce protease , virulence factor that break down host antibody to evade phagocytosis .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
some bacteria produce virulence factor that promote infection by exploit molecule naturally produce by the host .
for example , most strain of staphylococcus aureus produce the exoenzyme coagulase , which exploit the natural mechanism of blood clot to evade the immune system .
normally , blood clotting be trigger in response to blood vessel damage  platelet begin to plug the clot , and a cascade of reaction occur in which fibrinogen , a soluble protein make by the liver , be cleave into fibrin .
fibrin be an insoluble , thread - like protein that bind to blood platelet , cross - link , and contract to form a mesh of clumped platelet and red blood cell .
the result clot prevent further loss of blood from the damage blood vessel .
however , if bacteria release coagulase into the bloodstream , the fibrinogen - to - fibrin cascade be trigger in the absence of blood vessel damage .
the result clot coat the bacteria in fibrin , protect the bacteria from exposure to phagocytic immune cell circulate in the bloodstream .
whereas coagulase cause blood to clot , kinase have the opposite effect by trigger the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin , which be involve in the digestion of fibrin clot .
by digest a clot , kinase allow pathogen trap in the clot to escape and spread , similar to the way that collagenase , hyaluronidase , and dnase facilitate the spread of infection .
example of kinase include staphylokinase and streptokinase , produce by staphylococcus aureus and streptococcus pyogene , respectively .
- pron - be intriguing that s . aureus can produce both coagulase to promote clotting and staphylokinase to stimulate the digestion of clot .
the action of the coagulase provide an important protective barrier from the immune system , but when nutrient supply be diminished or other condition signal a need for the pathogen to escape and spread , the production of staphylokinase can initiate this process .
a final mechanism that pathogen can use to protect - pron - against the immune system be call antigenic variation , which be the alteration of surface protein so that a pathogen be no longer recognize by the host 's immune system .
for example , the bacterium borrelia burgdorferi , the causative agent of lyme disease , contain a surface lipoprotein know as vlse . because of genetic recombination during dna replication and repair , this bacterial protein undergoes antigenic variation .
each time fever occur , the vlse protein in b . burgdorferi can differ so much that antibody against previous vlse sequence be not effective .
- pron - be believe that this variation in the vlse contribute to the ability b . burgdorferi to cause chronic disease .
another important human bacterial pathogen that use antigenic variation to avoid the immune system be neisseria gonorrhoeae , which cause the sexually transmit disease gonorrhea .
this bacterium be well known for - pron - ability to undergo antigenic variation of - pron - type iv pili to avoid immune defense .

name at least two way that a capsule provide protection from the immune system .

besides capsule , name two other virulence factor use by bacteria to evade the immune system .
six  nine  two chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five resolution base on michael 's report symptom of stiff neck and hemiparesis , the physician suspect that the infection may have spread to - pron - nervous system .
the physician decide to order a spinal tap to look for any bacteria that may have invade the meninge and cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) , which would normally be sterile .
to perform the spinal tap , michael 's low back be swab with an iodine antiseptic and then cover with a sterile sheet .
the needle be aseptically remove from the manufacturer 's sealed plastic packaging by the clinician 's glove hand .
the needle be insert and a small volume of fluid be draw into an attach sample tube .
the tube be remove , cap and a prepared label with michael 's datum be affix to - pron - .
this stat ( urgent or immediate analysis require ) specimen be divide into three separate sterile tube , each with one ml of csf .
these tube be immediately take to the hospital 's lab , where - pron - be analyze in the clinical chemistry , hematology , and microbiology department .
the preliminary result from all three department indicate there be a cerebrospinal infection occur , with the microbiology department report the presence of a gram - positive rod in michael 's csf .
these result confirm what - pron - physician have suspect  michael 's new symptom be the result of meningitis , acute inflammation of the membrane that protect the brain and spinal cord .
because meningitis can be life threaten and because the first antibiotic therapy be not effective in prevent the spread of infection , michael be prescribe an aggressive course of two antibiotic , ampicillin and gentamicin , to be deliver intravenously .
michael remain in the hospital for several day for supportive care and for observation .
after a week , - pron - be allow to return home for bed rest and oral antibiotic .
after three week of this treatment , - pron - make a full recovery .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
viral virulence
although viral pathogen be not similar to bacterial pathogen in term of structure , some of the property that contribute to - pron - virulence be similar .
virus use adhesin to facilitate adhesion to host cell , and certain envelop virus rely on antigenic variation to avoid the host immune defense .
these virulence factor be discuss in more detail in the following section .
viral adhesins
one of the first step in any viral infection be adhesion of the virus to specific receptor on the surface of cell .
this process be mediate by adhesin that be part of the viral capsid or membrane envelope .
the interaction of viral adhesin with specific cell receptor define the tropism ( preferential targeting ) of virus for specific cell , tissue , and organ in the body .
the spike protein hemagglutinin find on influenzavirus be an example of a viral adhesin  - pron - allow the virus to bind to the sialic acid on the membrane of host respiratory and intestinal cell .
another viral adhesin be the glycoprotein gp two  zero , find on hiv .
for hiv to infect cell of the immune system , - pron - must interact with two receptor on the surface of cell .
the first interaction involve bind between gp one  two  zero and the cd four cellular marker that be find on some essential immune system cell .
however , before viral entry into the cell can occur , a second interaction between gp one  two  zero and one of two chemokine receptor ( ccr five and cxcr four ) must occur .
table one  five  .  one  one list the adhesin for some common viral pathogen and the specific site to which these adhesin allow virus to attach .
clinical focus chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  nine  three
some viral adhesins and - pron - host attachment sites pathogen disease adhesin attachment site influenzavirus influenza hemagglutinin sialic acid of respiratory and intestinal cell
herpes simplex virus i or ii oral herpe , genital herpe glycoproteins gb , gc , gd heparan
sulfate on mucosal surface of the mouth and genital human immunodeficiency virus
hiv / aids glycoprotein gp one  two  zero cd four and ccr five or cxcr four of immune system cell table one  five  .  one  one antigenic variation in viruses antigenic variation also occur in certain type of envelop virus , include influenza virus , which exhibit two form of antigenic variation  antigenic drift and antigenic shift ( figure one  five  .  one  eight ) .
antigenic drift be the result of point mutation cause slight change in the spike protein hemagglutinin ( h ) and neuraminidase ( n ) .
on the other hand , antigenic shift be a major change in spike protein due to gene reassortment .
this reassortment for antigenic shift occur typically when two different influenza virus infect the same host .
the rate of antigenic variation in influenza virus be very high , make - pron - difficult for the immune system to recognize the many different strain of influenzavirus .
although the body may develop immunity to one strain through natural exposure or vaccination , antigenic variation result in the continual emergence of new strain that the immune system will not recognize .
this be the main reason that vaccine against influenzavirus must be give annually .
each year 's influenza vaccine provide protection against the most prevalent strain for that year , but new or different strain may be more prevalent the following year .
six  nine  four
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  five  .  one  eight antigenic drift and antigenic shift in influenza virus .
( a )
in antigenic drift , mutation in the gene for the surface protein neuraminidase and / or hemagglutinin result in small antigenic change over time .
( b )
in antigenic shift , simultaneous infection of a cell with two different influenza virus result in mixing of the gene .
the resultant virus possess a mixture of the protein of the original virus .
influenza pandemic can often be trace to antigenic shift .
for another explanation of how antigenic shift and drift ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two antigenic ) occur , watch this video .

describe the role of adhesin in viral tropism .

explain the difference between antigenic drift and antigenic shift .
link to learning chapter one  five
 microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  nine  five one  five  .  four virulence factors of eukaryotic pathogens learning objectives

describe virulence factor unique to fungi and parasite

compare virulence factor of fungi and bacteria 
explain the difference between protozoan parasite and helminth
 describe how helminth evade the host immune system
although fungi and parasite be important pathogen cause infectious disease , - pron - pathogenic mechanism and virulence factor be not as well characterize as those of bacteria .
despite the relative lack of detailed mechanism , the stage of pathogenesis and general mechanism of virulence involve in disease production by these pathogen be similar to those of bacteria .
fungal virulence pathogenic fungi can produce virulence factor that be similar to the bacterial virulence factor that have be discuss earlier in this chapter .
in this section , - pron - will look at the virulence factor associate with specie of candida , cryptococcus , claviceps , and aspergillus .
candida albican be an opportunistic fungal pathogen and causative agent of oral thrush , vaginal yeast infection , and cutaneous candidiasis .
candida produce adhesin ( surface glycoprotein ) that bind to the phospholipid of epithelial and endothelial cell .
to assist in spread and tissue invasion , candida produce protease and phospholipase ( i . e . , exoenzyme ) .
one of these protease degrade keratin , a structural protein find on epithelial cell , enhance the ability of the fungus to invade host tissue .
in animal study , - pron - have be show that the addition of a protease inhibitor lead to attenuation of
candida infection . [ nine ]
similarly , the phospholipase can affect the integrity of host cell membrane to facilitate invasion .
the main virulence factor for cryptococcus , a fungus that cause pneumonia and meningitis , be capsule production .
the polysaccharide glucuronoxylomannan be the principal constituent of the cryptococcus capsule .
similar to encapsulated bacterial cell , encapsulate cryptococcus cell be more resistant to phagocytosis than nonencapsulated cryptococcus , which be effectively phagocytose and , therefore , less virulent .
like some bacteria , many fungi produce exotoxin .
fungal toxin be call mycotoxin .
clavicep purpurea , a fungus that grow on rye and related grain , produce a mycotoxin call ergot toxin , an alkaloid responsible for the disease know as ergotism .
there be two form of ergotism  gangrenous and convulsive .
in gangrenous ergotism , the ergot toxin cause vasoconstriction , result in improper blood flow to the extremity , eventually lead to gangrene .
a famous outbreak of gangrenous ergotism occur in eastern europe during the five th century ad due to the consumption of rye contaminate with c . purpurea .
in convulsive ergotism , the toxin target the central nervous system , cause mania and hallucination .
the mycotoxin aflatoxin be a virulence factor produce by the fungus aspergillus , an opportunistic pathogen that can enter the body via contaminate food or by inhalation .
inhalation of the fungus can lead to the chronic pulmonary disease aspergillosis , characterize by fever , bloody sputum , and / or asthma .
aflatoxin act in the host as both a mutagen ( a substance that cause mutation in dna ) and a carcinogen ( a substance involve in cause cancer ) , and have be associate with the development of liver cancer .
aflatoxin have also be show to cross the blood - placental barrier . [ one  zero ]
a second mycotoxin produce by aspergillus be gliotoxin .
this toxin promote virulence by induce host cell to self - destruct and by evade the host 's immune response by inhibit the function of phagocytic cell as well as the pro - inflammatory response .
like candida , aspergillus also produce several protease .
one be elastase , which break down the protein elastin find in the connective tissue of the lung , lead to the development of lung disease .
nine .
k . fallon et al .
“
role of aspartic proteases in disseminated candida albican infection in mice .
”
infection and immunity six  five no .
two ( one  nine  nine  seven  )  five  five  one – five  five  six . one  zero .
c . p . wild et al .
“
in - utero exposure to aflatoxin in west africa .
"
lancet three  three  seven
no .
eight  seven  five  seven
( one  nine  nine  one  )  one  six  zero  two . six  nine  six
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five another be catalase , an enzyme that protect the fungus from hydrogen peroxide produce by the immune system to destroy pathogen .
 list virulence factor common to bacteria and fungi .

what function do mycotoxin perform to help fungi survive in the host ?
protozoan virulence protozoan pathogen be unicellular eukaryotic parasite that have virulence factor and pathogenic mechanism analogous to prokaryotic and viral pathogen , include adhesin , toxin , antigenic variation , and the ability to survive inside phagocytic vesicle .
protozoan often have unique feature for attach to host cell .
the protozoan giardia lamblia , which cause the intestinal disease giardiasis , use a large adhesive disc compose of microtubule to attach to the intestinal mucosa .
during adhesion , the flagella of g . lamblia move in a manner that draw fluid out from under the disc , result in an area of low pressure that facilitate adhesion to epithelial cell .
giardia do not invade the intestinal cell but rather cause inflammation ( possibly through the release of cytopathic substance that cause damage to the cell ) and shorten the intestinal villi , inhibit absorption of nutrient .
some protozoan be capable of antigenic variation .
the obligate intracellular pathogen plasmodium falciparum ( one of the causative agent of malaria ) reside inside red blood cell , where - pron - produce an adhesin membrane protein know as pfemp one .
this protein be express on the surface of the infected erythrocyte , cause blood cell to stick to each other and to the wall of blood vessel .
this process impede blood flow , sometimes lead to organ failure , anemia , jaundice ( yellowing of skin and sclera of the eye due to buildup of bilirubin from lysed red blood cell ) , and , subsequently , death .
although pfemp one can be recognize by the host 's immune system , antigenic variation in the structure of the protein over time prevent - pron - from be easily recognize and eliminate .
this allow malaria to persist as a chronic infection in many individual .
the virulence factor of trypanosoma brucei , the causative agent of african sleep sickness , include the ability to form capsule and undergo antigenic variation .
t . brucei evade phagocytosis by produce a dense glycoprotein coat that resemble a bacterial capsule .
over time , host antibody be produce that recognize this coat , but t . brucei be able to alter the structure of the glycoprotein to evade recognition .

explain how antigenic variation by protozoan pathogen help - pron - survive in the host .
helminth virulence helminths , or parasitic worm , be multicellular eukaryotic parasite that depend heavily on virulence factor that allow - pron - to gain entry to host tissue .
for example , the aquatic larval form of schistosoma mansoni , which cause schistosomiasis , penetrate intact skin with the aid of protease that degrade skin protein , include elastin .
to survive within the host long enough to perpetuate - pron - often - complex life cycle , helminth need to evade the immune system .
some helminth be so large that the immune system be ineffective against - pron - .
other , such as adult roundworm ( which cause trichinosis , ascariasis , and other disease ) , be protect by a tough outer cuticle .
over the course of - pron - life cycle , the surface characteristic of the parasite vary , which may help prevent an effective immune response .
some helminth express polysaccharide call glycan on - pron - external surface  because chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity six  nine  seven
these glycan resemble molecule produce by host cell , the immune system fail to recognize and attack the helminth as a foreign body .
this “ glycan gimmickry , " as - pron - have be call , serve as a protective cloak that allow the helminth to escape detection by the immune system . [ one  one ]
in addition to evading host defense , helminth can actively suppress the immune system .
s . mansoni , for example , degrade host antibody with protease .
helminth produce many other substance that suppress element of both innate nonspecific and adaptive specific host defense .
- pron - also release large amount of material into the host that may locally overwhelm the immune system or cause - pron - to respond inappropriately .

describe how helminth avoid be destroy by the host immune system .
summary one  five  .  one characteristics of infectious disease 
in an infection , a microorganism enter a host and begin to multiply .
some infection cause disease , which be any deviation from the normal function or structure of the host .

sign of a disease be objective and be measure .
symptom of a disease be subjective and be report by the patient .

diseases can either be noninfectious ( due to genetic and environment ) or infectious ( due to pathogen ) .
some infectious disease be communicable ( transmissible between individual ) or contagious ( easily transmissible between individual )  other be noncommunicable , but may be contract via contact with environmental reservoir or animal ( zoonosis )

nosocomial disease be contract in hospital setting , whereas iatrogenic disease be the direct result of a medical procedure 
an acute disease be short in duration , whereas a chronic disease last for month or year .
latent disease last for year , but be distinguish from chronic disease by the lack of active replication during extended dormant period .

the period of disease include the incubation period , the prodromal period , the period of illness , the period of decline , and the period of convalescence .
these period be mark by change in the number of infectious agent and the severity of sign and symptom .
one  five  .  two
how pathogens cause disease 
koch 's postulate be use to determine whether a particular microorganism be a pathogen .
molecular koch
's postulate be use to determine what gene contribute to a pathogen 's ability to cause disease .

virulence , the degree to which a pathogen can cause disease , can be quantify by calculate either the id five  zero or ld five  zero of a pathogen on a give population .
 primary pathogen be capable of cause pathological change associate with disease in a healthy individual , whereas opportunistic pathogen can only cause disease when the individual be compromise by a break in protective barrier or immunosuppression .

infections and disease can be cause by pathogen in the environment or microbe in an individual 's resident microbiota .

infection can be classify as local , focal , or systemic depending on the extent to which the pathogen spread in the body .

a secondary infection can sometimes occur after the host 's defense or normal microbiota be compromise one  one .
i . van die , r . d . cummings .
“ glycan gimmickry by parasitic helminths  a strategy for modulate the host immune response ?
"
glycobiology two  zero
no .
one ( two  zero  one  zero  )  two – one  two . six  nine  eight
chapter one  five  microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five by a primary infection or antibiotic treatment .

pathogens enter the body through portal of entry and leave through portal of exit .
the stage of pathogenesis include exposure , adhesion , invasion , infection , and transmission .
one  five  .  three virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens

virulence factor contribute to a pathogen 's ability to cause disease .

exoenzymes and toxin allow pathogen to invade host tissue and cause tissue damage .
exoenzyme be classify accord to the macromolecule - pron - target and exotoxin be classify base on - pron - mechanism of action .

bacterial toxin include endotoxin and exotoxin .
endotoxin be the lipid
a component of the lps of the gramnegative cell envelope .
exotoxin be protein secrete mainly by gram - positive bacteria , but also be secrete by gram - negative bacteria .

bacterial pathogen may evade the host immune response by produce capsule to avoid phagocytosis , survive the intracellular environment of phagocyte , degrade antibody , or through antigenic variation .
 viral pathogen use adhesin for initiate infection and antigenic variation to avoid immune defense .

influenza virus use both antigenic drift and antigenic shift to avoid be recognize by the immune system .
one  five  .  four virulence factors of eukaryotic pathogens 
fungal and parasitic pathogen use pathogenic mechanism and virulence factor that be similar to those of bacterial pathogen  fungi initiate infection through the interaction of adhesin with receptor on host cell .
some fungi produce toxin and exoenzyme involve in disease production and capsule that provide protection of phagocytosis .

protozoa adhere to target cell through complex mechanism and can cause cellular damage through release of cytopathic substance .
some protozoa avoid the immune system through antigenic variation and production of capsule .

helminthic worm be able to avoid the immune system by coat - pron - exterior with glycan molecule that make - pron - look like host cell or by suppress the immune system .
chapter one  six disease and epidemiology figure one  six  .  one
sign like this may seem self - explanatory today , but a few short century ago , people lack a basic understanding of how disease spread .
microbiology have greatly contribute to the field of epidemiology , which focus on contain the spread of disease .
( credit  modification of work by tony webster )
chapter outline one  six  .  one
the language of epidemiologists one  six  .  two track infectious diseases one  six  .  three modes of disease transmission one  six  .  four
global public health introduction
in the united states and other develop nation , public health be a key function of government .
a healthy citizenry be more productive , content , and prosperous  high rate of death and disease , on the other hand , can severely hamper economic productivity and foster social and political instability .
the burden of disease make - pron - difficult for citizen to work consistently , maintain employment , and accumulate wealth to better - pron - life and support a grow economy .
in this chapter , - pron - will explore the intersection between microbiology and epidemiology , the science that underlie public health .
epidemiology study how disease originate and spread throughout a population , with the goal of prevent outbreak and contain - pron - when - pron - do occur .
over the past two century , discovery in epidemiology have lead to public health policy that have transform life in develop nation , lead to the eradication ( or near eradication ) of many disease that be once cause of great human suffering and premature death .
however , the work of epidemiologist be far from finish .
numerous disease continue to plague humanity , and new disease be always emerge .
moreover , in the develop world , lack of infrastructure continue to pose many challenge to effort to contain disease .
chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
seven  zero  three one  six  .  one the language of epidemiologists learning objectives

explain the difference between prevalence and incidence of disease  distinguish the characteristic of sporadic , endemic , epidemic , and pandemic disease 
explain the use of koch 's postulate and - pron - modification to determine the etiology of disease 
explain the relationship between epidemiology and public health
the field of epidemiology concern the geographical distribution and timing of infectious disease occurrence and how - pron - be transmit and maintain in nature , with the goal of recognize and control outbreak .
the science of epidemiology include etiology ( the study of the cause of disease ) and investigation of disease transmission ( mechanism by which a disease be spread ) .
analyze disease in a population epidemiological analysis be always carry out with reference to a population , which be the group of individual that be at risk for the disease or condition .
the population can be define geographically , but if only a portion of the individual in that area be susceptible , additional criterion may be require .
susceptible individual may be define by particular behavior , such as intravenous drug use , own particular pet , or membership in an institution , such as a college .
be able to define the population be important because most measure of interest in epidemiology be make with reference to the size of the population .
the state of be disease be call morbidity .
morbidity in a population can be express in a few different way .
morbidity or total morbidity be express in number of individual without reference to the size of the population .
the morbidity rate can be express as the number of disease individual out of a standard number of individual in the population , such as one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero , or as a percent of the population .
there be two aspect of morbidity that be relevant to an epidemiologist  a disease 's prevalence and - pron - incidence .
prevalence be the number , or proportion , of individual with a particular illness in a give population at a point in time .
for example , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimate that in two  zero  one  two , there be about one  .  two million people one  three year and old with an active human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) infection .
express as a proportion , or rate , this be a prevalence of four  six  seven infect person per one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero in the population . [ one ]
on the other hand , part one
in late november and early december , a hospital in western florida start to see a spike in the number of case of acute gastroenteritis - like symptom .
patient begin arrive at the emergency department complaining of excessive bout of emesis ( vomiting ) and diarrhea ( with no blood in the stool ) .
- pron - also complain of abdominal pain and cramping , and most be severely dehydrate .
alarm by the number of case , hospital staff make some call and learn that other regional hospital be also see one  zero to two  zero similar case per day .

what be some possible cause of this outbreak ?

in what way could these case be link , and how could any suspect link be confirm ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one .
h . irene hall , qian an , tian tang , ruiguang song , mi chen , timothy green , and jian kang .
“
prevalence of diagnosed and seven  zero  four chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five incidence be the number or proportion of new case in a period of time .
for the same year and population , the cdc estimate that there be four  three  ,  one  six  five newly diagnose case of hiv infection , which be an incidence of one  three  .  seven new case per one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero in the population . [ two ]
the relationship between incidence and prevalence can be see in figure one  six  .  two .
for a chronic disease like hiv infection , prevalence will generally be high than incidence because - pron - represent the cumulative number of new case over many year minus the number of case that be no longer active ( e . g . , because the patient die or be cure ) .
in addition to morbidity rate , the incidence and prevalence of mortality ( death ) may also be report .
a mortality rate can be express as the percentage of the population that have die from a disease or as the number of death per one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero person ( or other suitable standard number ) .
figure one  six  .  two
this graph compare the incidence of hiv ( the number of new case report each year ) with the prevalence ( the total number of case each year ) .
prevalence and incidence can also be express as a rate or proportion for a give population .

explain the difference between incidence and prevalence .

describe how morbidity and mortality rate be express .
pattern of incidence diseases that be see only occasionally , and usually without geographic concentration , be call sporadic disease .
example of sporadic disease include tetanus , rabie , and plague .
in the united states , clostridium tetani , the bacterium that cause tetanus , be ubiquitous in the soil environment , but incidence of infection occur only rarely and in scatter location because most individual be vaccinate , clean wound appropriately , or be only rarely in a situation that would cause infection . [ three ]
likewise in the united states there be a few scatter case of plague each year , usually contract from rodent in rural area in the western states . [ four ]
undiagnosed hiv infection - united states , two  zero  zero  eight – two  zero  one  two .
"
morbidity and mortality weekly report six  four , no . two  four ( two  zero  one  five ) 
six  five  seven – six  six  two . two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
diagnoses of hiv infection in the united states and dependent areas , two  zero  one  four .
"
hiv surveillance report two  six ( two  zero  one  five ) .
three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
tetanus surveillance - united states , two  zero  zero  one – two  zero  zero  eight .
"
morbidity and mortality weekly report six  zero , no . one  two ( two  zero  one  one ) 
three  six  five .
chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  zero  five disease that be constantly present ( often at a low level ) in a population within a particular geographic region be call endemic disease .
for example , malaria be endemic to some region of brazil , but be not endemic to the united states .
disease for which a large than expected number of case occur in a short time within a geographic region be call epidemic disease .
influenza be a good example of a commonly epidemic disease .
incidence pattern of influenza tend to rise each winter in the northern hemisphere .
these seasonal increase be expect , so - pron - would not be accurate to say that influenza be epidemic every winter  however , some winter have an usually large number of seasonal influenza case in particular region , and such situation would qualify as epidemic ( figure one  six  .  three and figure one  six  .  four ) .
an epidemic disease signal the breakdown of an equilibrium in disease frequency , often result from some change in environmental condition or in the population .
in the case of influenza , the disruption can be due to antigenic shift or drift ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) , which allow influenza virus strain to circumvent the acquire immunity of - pron - human host .
an epidemic that occur on a worldwide scale be call a pandemic disease .
for example , hiv / aids be a pandemic disease and novel influenza virus strain often become pandemic .
figure one  six  .  three
the two  zero  zero  seven – two  zero  zero  eight influenza season in the united states see much high than normal number of visit to emergency department for influenza - like symptom as compare to the previous and the follow year .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
four .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
plague in the united states .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / plague / map .
accessed june one , two  zero  one  six .
seven  zero  six chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  six  .  four
the seasonal epidemic threshold ( blue curve ) be set by the cdc - base datum from the previous five year .
when actual mortality rate exceed this threshold , a disease be consider to be epidemic .
as this graph show , pneumonia - and influenza - relate mortality see pronounce epidemic during the winter of two  zero  zero  three – two  zero  zero  four , two  zero  zero  five , and two  zero  zero  eight .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

explain the difference between sporadic and endemic disease .

explain the difference between endemic and epidemic disease .
part two hospital physician suspect that some type of food poisoning be to blame for the sudden post - thanksgiving outbreak of gastroenteritis in western florida .
over a two - week period , two  five  four case be observe , but by the end of the first week of december , the epidemic cease just as quickly as - pron - have start .
suspect a link between the case base on the localized nature of the outbreak , hospital hand over - pron - medical record to the regional public health office for study .
laboratory testing of stool sample have indicate that the infection be cause by salmonella bacteria .
patient range from child as young as three to senior in - pron - late eighty .
case be nearly evenly split between male and female .
across the region , there have be three confirm death in the outbreak , all due to severe dehydration .
in each of the fatal case , the patient have not seek medical care until - pron - symptom be severe  also , all of the deceased have preexist medical condition such as congestive heart failure , diabetes , or high blood pressure .
clinical focus chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  zero  seven
after review the medical record , epidemiologist with the public health office decide to conduct interview with a randomly select sample of patient .

what conclusion , if any , can be draw from the medical record ?

what would epidemiologist hope to learn by interview patient ?
what kind of question may - pron - ask ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
etiology
when study an epidemic , an epidemiologist 's first task be to determinate the cause of the disease , call the etiologic agent or causative agent .
connect a disease to a specific pathogen can be challenge because of the extra effort typically require to demonstrate direct causation as oppose to a simple association .
- pron - be not enough to observe an association between a disease and a suspect pathogen  control experiment be need to eliminate other possible cause .
in addition , pathogen be typically difficult to detect when there be no immediate clue as to what be cause the outbreak .
sign and symptom of disease be also commonly nonspecific , mean that many different agent can give rise to the same set of sign and symptom .
this complicate diagnosis even when a causative agent be familiar to scientist .
robert koch be the first scientist to specifically demonstrate the causative agent of a disease ( anthrax ) in the late one  eight  zero  zero .
koch develop four criterion , now know as koch 's postulate , which have to be meet in order to positively link a disease with a pathogenic microbe .
without koch 's postulate , the golden age of microbiology would not have occur .
between one  eight  seven  six and one  nine  zero  five , many common disease be link with - pron - etiologic agent , include cholera , diphtheria , gonorrhea , meningitis , plague , syphilis , tetanu , and tuberculosis .
today , - pron - use the molecular koch 's postulate , a variation of koch 's original postulate that can be use to establish a link between the disease state and virulence trait unique to a pathogenic strain of a microbe .
koch 's original postulate and molecular koch 's postulate be describe in more detail in how pathogens cause disease .

list some challenge to determine the causative agent of a disease outbreak .
the role of public health organizations
the main national public health agency in the united states be the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , an agency of the department of health and human services .
the cdc be charge with protect the public from disease and injury .
one way that the cdc carry out this mission be by oversee the national notifiable disease surveillance system ( nndss ) in cooperation with regional , state , and territorial public health department .
the nndss monitor disease consider to be of public health importance on a national scale .
such disease be call notifiable disease or reportable disease because all case must be report to the cdc .
a physician treat a patient with a notifiable disease be legally require to submit a report on the case .
notifiable disease include hiv infection , measle , west nile virus infection , and many other .
some state have - pron - own list of notifiable disease that include disease beyond those on the cdc 's list .
notifiable disease be track by epidemiological study and the data be use to inform health - care provider and the public about possible risk .
the cdc publish the morbidity and mortality weekly report ( mmwr ) , which provide physician and health - care worker with update on public health issue and the late datum pertain to notifiable disease .
table one  six  .  one be an example of the kind of datum contain in the mmwr .
seven  zero  eight chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five incidence of four notifiable diseases in the united states , week ending january two , two  zero  one  six
disease current week ( jan two , two  zero  one  six )
median of previous five  two weeks maximum of previous five  two week cumulative case
two  zero  one  five campylobacteriosis four  zero  six eight  six  nine one  ,  three  eight  five four  six  ,  six  one  eight chlamydia trachomatis infection one  one  ,  zero  two  four two  eight  ,  five  six  two three  one  ,  zero  eight  nine one  ,  four  two  five  ,  three  zero  three giardiasis one  one  five two  three  zero three  three  five one  one  ,  eight  seven  zero gonorrhea three  ,  two  zero  seven seven  ,  one  five  five eight  ,  two  eight  three three  six  nine  ,  nine  two  six table one  six  .  one
the current morbidity and mortality weekly report ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two mortweekrep ) be available online .

describe how health agency obtain datum about the incidence of disease of public health importance .
one  six  .  two track infectious diseases
learning objectives

explain the research approach use by the pioneer of epidemiology

explain how descriptive , analytical , and experimental epidemiological study go about determine the cause of morbidity and mortality
epidemiology have - pron - root in the work of physician who look for pattern in disease occurrence as a way to understand how to prevent - pron - .
the idea that disease could be transmit be an important precursor to make sense of some of the pattern .
in one  five  four  six , girolamo fracastoro first propose the germ theory of disease in - pron - essay de contagione et contagiosis morbis , but this theory remain in competition with other theory , such as the miasma hypothesis , for many year ( see what - pron - ancestors knew ) .
uncertainty about the cause of disease be not an absolute barrier to obtain useful knowledge from pattern of disease .
some important researcher , such as florence nightingale , subscribe to the miasma hypothesis .
the transition to acceptance of the germ theory during the one  nine th century provide a solid mechanistic grounding to the study of disease pattern .
the study of one  nine th century physician and researcher such as john snow , florence nightingale , ignaz semmelweis , joseph lister , robert koch , louis pasteur , and other sow the seed of modern epidemiology .
link to learning chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
seven  zero  nine pioneers of epidemiology john snow ( figure one  six  .  five ) be a british physician know as the father of epidemiology for determine the source of the one  eight  five  four broad street cholera epidemic in london .
base on observation - pron - have make during an early cholera outbreak ( one  eight  four  eight – one  eight  four  nine ) , snow propose that cholera be spread through a fecal - oral route of transmission and that a microbe be the infectious agent .
- pron - investigate the one  eight  five  four cholera epidemic in two way .
first , suspect that contaminate water be the source of the epidemic , snow identify the source of water for those infect .
- pron - find a high frequency of cholera case among individual who obtain - pron - water from the river thames downstream from london .
this water contain the refuse and sewage from london and settlement upstream .
- pron - also note that brewery worker do not contract cholera and on investigation find the owner provide the worker with beer to drink and state that - pron - likely do not drink water . [ five ]
second , - pron - also painstakingly map the incidence of cholera and find a high frequency among those individual use a particular water pump locate on broad street .
in response to snow 's advice , local official remove the pump 's handle , [ six ] result in the containment of the broad street cholera epidemic .
snow 's work represent an early epidemiological study and - pron - result in the first know public health response to an epidemic .
snow 's meticulous case - tracking method be now common practice in study disease outbreak and in associate new disease with - pron - cause .
- pron - work further shed light on unsanitary sewage practice and the effect of waste dumping in the thames .
additionally , - pron - work support the germ theory of disease , which argue disease could be transmit through contaminate item , include water contaminate with fecal matter .
snow 's work illustrate what be refer to today as a common source spread of infectious disease , in which there be a single source for all of the individual infect .
in this case , the single source be the contaminate well below the broad street pump .
type of common source spread include point source spread , continuous common source spread , and intermittent common source spread .
in point source spread of infectious disease , the common source operate for a short time period - less than the incubation period of the pathogen .
an example of point source spread be a single contaminate potato salad at a group picnic .
in continuous common source spread , the infection occur for an extended period of time , longer than the incubation period .
an example of continuous common source spread would be the source of london water take downstream of the city , which be continuously contaminate with sewage from upstream .
finally , with intermittent common source spread , infection occur for a period , stop , and then begin again .
this may be see in infection from a well that be contaminate only after large rainfall and that clear - pron - of contamination after a short period .
in contrast to common source spread , propagate spread occur through direct or indirect person - to - person contact .
with propagated spread , there be no single source for infection  each infect individual become a source for one or more subsequent infection .
with propagated spread , unless the spread be stop immediately , infection occur for long than the incubation period .
although point source often lead to large - scale but localized outbreak of short duration , propagate spread typically result in long duration outbreak that can vary from small to large , depend on the population and the disease ( figure one  six  .  six ) .
in addition , because of person - to - person transmission , propagate spread can not be easily stop at a single source like point source spread .
five .
john snow .
on the mode of communication of cholera .
second edition , much enlarge .
john churchill , one  eight  five  five .
six .
john snow .
"
the cholera near golden - wquare , and at deptford .
"
medical times and gazette nine ( one  eight  five  four )
 three  two  one – three  two  two . http / / www . ph . ucla . edu / epi / snow / choleragoldensquare . html .
seven  one  zero chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  six  .  five ( a )
john snow ( one  eight  one  three – one  eight  five  eight ) , british physician and father of epidemiology .
( b )
snow 's detailed mapping of cholera incidence lead to the discovery of the contaminated water pump on broad street ( red square ) responsible for the one  eight  five  four cholera epidemic .
( credit a  modification of work by “ rsabbatini” / wikimedia common ) figure one  six  .  six
( a ) outbreak that can be attribute to point source spread often have a short duration .
( b ) outbreaks attribute to propagate spread can have a more extended duration .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
florence nightingale 's work be another example of an early epidemiological study .
in one  eight  five  four , nightingale be part of a contingent of nurse dispatch by the british military to care for wounded soldier during the crimean war .
nightingale keep meticulous record regard the cause of illness and death during the war .
- pron - recordkeeping be a fundamental task of what would later become the science of epidemiology .
- pron - analysis of the datum - pron - collect be publish in one  eight  five  eight .
in this book , - pron - present monthly frequency datum on cause of death in a wedge chart histogram ( figure one  six  .  seven ) .
this graphical presentation of datum , unusual at the time , powerfully illustrate that the vast majority of chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  one  one casualty during the war occur not due to wound sustain in action but to what nightingale deem preventable infectious disease .
often these disease occur because of poor sanitation and lack of access to hospital facility .
nightingale 's finding lead to many reform in the british military 's system of medical care .
joseph lister provide early epidemiological evidence lead to good public health practice in clinic and hospital .
these setting be notorious in the mid -  one  eight  zero  zero for fatal infection of surgical wound at a time when the germ theory of disease be not yet widely accept ( see foundations of modern cell theory ) .
most physician do not wash - pron - hand between patient visit or clean and sterilize - pron - surgical tool .
lister , however , discover the disinfect property of carbolic acid , also know as phenol ( see use chemical to control microorganisms ) .
- pron - introduce several disinfection protocol that dramatically lower post - surgical infection rates . [ seven ]
- pron - demand that surgeon who work for - pron - use a five % carbolic acid solution to clean - pron - surgical tool between patient , and even go so far as to spray the solution onto bandage and over the surgical site during operation ( figure one  six  .  eight ) .
- pron - also take precaution not to introduce source of infection from - pron - skin or clothing by remove - pron - coat , roll up - pron - sleeve , and wash - pron - hand in a dilute solution of carbolic acid before and during the surgery .
figure one  six  .  seven ( a )
florence nightingale report on the datum - pron - collect as a nurse in the crimean war .
( b )
nightingale 's diagram show the number of fatality in soldier by month of the conflict from various cause .
the total number dead in a particular month be equal to the area of the wedge for that month .
the colored section of the wedge represent different cause of death  wound ( pink ) , preventable infectious disease ( gray ) , and all other cause ( brown ) .
seven .
o . m . lidwell .
“
joseph lister and infection from the air .
”
epidemiology and infection nine  nine ( one  nine  eight  seven )  five  six  nine – five  seven  eight .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / article / pmc two  two  four  nine  two  three  six  / pdf / epidinfect zero  zero  zero  zero  six - zero  zero  zero  four  . pdf .
seven  one  two chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  six  .  eight
joseph lister initiate the use of a carbolic acid ( phenol ) during surgery .
this illustration of a surgery show a pressurize canister of carbolic acid be spray over the surgical site .
visit the website ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two theghostmap ) for the ghost map , a book about snow 's work relate to the broad street pump cholera outbreak .
john snow 's own account of - pron - work ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two johnsnowacco ) have additional link and information .
this cdc resource ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two cdcpointsourc ) further break down the pattern expect from a point - source outbreak .
learn more about nightingale 's wedge chart ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two nightwedgecha ) here .

explain the difference between common source spread and propagated spread of disease .

describe how the observation of john snow , florence nightingale , and joseph lister lead to improvement in public health .
type of epidemiological studies today , epidemiologist make use of study design , the manner in which datum be gather to test a hypothesis , similar to those of researcher study other phenomenon that occur in population .
these approach can be divide into observational study ( in which subject be not manipulate ) and experimental study ( in which subject be manipulate ) .
collectively , these study give modern - day epidemiologist multiple tool for explore the connection between infectious disease and the population of susceptible individual - pron - may infect .
observational studies
in an observational study , datum be gather from study participant through measurement ( such as physiological variable like white blood cell count ) , or answer to question in interview ( such as recent travel or exercise link to learn chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  one  three frequency ) .
the subject in an observational study be typically choose at random from a population of affected or unaffected individual .
however , the subject in an observational study be in no way manipulate by the researcher .
observational study be typically easy to carry out than experimental study , and in certain situation - pron - may be the only study possible for ethical reason .
observational study be only able to measure association between disease occurrence and possible causative agent  - pron - do not necessarily prove a causal relationship .
for example , suppose a study find an association between heavy coffee drinking and low incidence of skin cancer .
this may suggest that coffee prevent skin cancer , but there may be another unmeasured factor involve , such as the amount of sun exposure the participant receive .
if - pron - turn out that coffee drinker work more in office and spend less time outside in the sun than those who drink less coffee , then - pron - may be possible that the low rate of skin cancer be due to less sun exposure , not to coffee consumption .
the observational study can not distinguish between these two potential cause .
there be several useful approach in observational study .
these include method classify as descriptive epidemiology and analytical epidemiology .
descriptive epidemiology gather information about a disease outbreak , the affect individual , and how the disease have spread over time in an exploratory stage of study .
this type of study will involve interview with patient , - pron - contact , and - pron - family member  examination of sample and medical record  and even history of food and beverage consume .
such a study may be conduct while the outbreak be still occur .
descriptive study may form the basis for develop a hypothesis of causation that could be test by more rigorous observational and experimental study .
analytical epidemiology employ carefully select group of individual in an attempt to more convincingly evaluate hypothesis about potential cause for a disease outbreak .
the selection of case be generally make at random , so the result be not biased because of some common characteristic of the study participant .
analytical study may gather - pron - datum by go back in time ( retrospective study ) , or as event unfold forward in time ( prospective study ) .
retrospective study gather datum from the past on present - day case .
datum can include thing like the medical history , age , gender , or occupational history of the affect individual .
this type of study examine association between factor choose or available to the researcher and disease occurrence .
prospective study follow individual and monitor - pron - disease state during the course of the study .
datum on the characteristic of the study subject and - pron - environment be gather at the beginning and during the study so that subject who become ill may be compare with those who do not .
again , the researcher can look for association between the disease state and variable that be measure during the study to shed light on possible cause .
analytical study incorporate group into - pron - design to assist in tease out association with disease .
approach to group - base analytical study include cohort study , case - control study , and cross - sectional study .
the cohort method examine group of individual ( call cohort ) who share a particular characteristic .
for example , a cohort may consist of individual bear in the same year and the same place  or - pron - may consist of people who practice or avoid a particular behavior , e . g . , smoker or nonsmoker .
in a cohort study , cohort can be follow prospectively or study retrospectively .
if only a single cohort be follow , then the affect individual be compare with the unaffected individual in the same group .
disease outcome be record and analyze to try to identify correlation between characteristic of individual in the cohort and disease incidence .
cohort study be a useful way to determine the cause of a condition without violate the ethical prohibition of expose subject to a risk factor .
cohort be typically identify and define base on suspect risk factor to which individual have already be expose through - pron - own choice or circumstance .
case - control study be typically retrospective and compare a group of individual with a disease to a similar group of individual without the disease .
case - control study be far more efficient than cohort study because researcher can deliberately select subject who be already affect with the disease as oppose to wait to see which subject from a random sample will develop a disease .
a cross - sectional study analyze randomly select individual in a population and compare individual affect by a disease or condition to those unaffected at a single point in time .
subject be compare to look for association between certain measurable variable and the disease or condition .
cross - sectional study be also use to determine seven  one  four chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the prevalence of a condition .
experimental studies experimental epidemiology use laboratory or clinical study in which the investigator manipulate the study subject to study the connection between disease and potential causative agent or to assess treatment .
example of treatment may be the administration of a drug , the inclusion or exclusion of different dietary item , physical exercise , or a particular surgical procedure .
animal or human be use as test subject .
because experimental study involve manipulation of subject , - pron - be typically more difficult and sometimes impossible for ethical reason .
koch 's postulate require experimental intervention to determine the causative agent for a disease .
unlike observational study , experimental study can provide strong evidence support cause because other factor be typically hold constant when the researcher manipulate the subject .
the outcome for one group receive the treatment be compare to outcome for a group that do not receive the treatment but be treat the same in every other way .
for example , one group may receive a regimen of a drug administer as a pill , while the untreated group receive a placebo ( a pill that look the same but have no active ingredient ) .
both group be treat as similarly as possible except for the administration of the drug .
because other variable be hold constant in both the treated and the untreated group , the researcher be more certain that any change in the treated group be a result of the specific manipulation .
experimental study provide the strong evidence for the etiology of disease , but - pron - must also be design carefully to eliminate subtle effect of bias .
typically , experimental study with human be conduct as doubleblind study , mean neither the subject nor the researcher know who be a treatment case and who be not .
this design remove a well - know cause of bias in research call the placebo effect , in which knowledge of the treatment by either the subject or the researcher can influence the outcome .

describe the advantage and disadvantage of observational study and experimental study .

explain the way that group of subject can be select for analytical study .
part three
since laboratory test have confirm salmonella , a common foodborne pathogen , as the etiologic agent , epidemiologist suspect that the outbreak be cause by contamination at a food processing facility serve the region .
interview with patient focus on food consumption during and after the thanksgiving holiday , correspond with the timing of the outbreak .
during the interview , patient be ask to list item consume at holiday gathering and describe how widely each item be consume among family member and relative .
- pron - be also ask about the source of food item ( e . g . , brand , location of purchase , date of purchase ) .
by ask such question , health official hop to identify pattern that would lead back to the source of the outbreak .
analysis of the interview response eventually link almost all of the case to consumption of a holiday dish know as the turducken - a chicken stuff inside a duck stuff inside a turkey .
turducken be a dish not generally consume year - round , which would explain the spike in case just after the thanksgiving holiday .
additional analysis reveal that the turducken consume by the affect patient be purchase already stuff and ready to be cook .
moreover , the pre - stuff turducken be all sell at the same regional grocery chain under two different brand name .
upon further investigation , official trace both brand to a clinical focus chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  one  five single processing plant that supply store throughout the florida panhandle .

be this an example of common source spread or propagate spread ?

what next step would the public health office likely take after identify the source of the outbreak ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  six  .  three mode of disease
transmission learning objectives
 describe the different type of disease reservoir  compare contact , vector , and vehicle mode of transmission 
identify important disease vector 
explain the prevalence of nosocomial infection
understand how infectious pathogen spread be critical to prevent infectious disease .
many pathogen require a live host to survive , while other may be able to persist in a dormant state outside of a live host .
but have infect one host , all pathogen must also have a mechanism of transfer from one host to another or - pron - will die when - pron - host die .
pathogen often have elaborate adaptation to exploit host biology , behavior , and ecology to live in and move between host .
host have evolve defense against pathogen , but because - pron - rate of evolution be typically slow than - pron - pathogen ( because - pron - generation time be long ) , host be usually at an evolutionary disadvantage .
this section will explore where pathogen survive - both inside and outside host - and some of the many way - pron - move from one host to another .
reservoirs and carriers for pathogen to persist over long period of time - pron - require reservoir where - pron - normally reside .
reservoir can be live organism or nonlive site .
nonlive reservoir can include soil and water in the environment .
these may naturally harbor the organism because - pron - may grow in that environment .
these environment may also become contaminate with pathogen in human fece , pathogen shed by intermediate host , or pathogen contain in the remain of intermediate host .
pathogen may have mechanism of dormancy or resilience that allow - pron - to survive ( but typically not to reproduce ) for vary period of time in nonlive environment .
for example , clostridium tetani survive in the soil and in the presence of oxygen as a resistant endospore .
although many virus be soon destroy once in contact with air , water , or other non - physiological condition , certain type be capable of persist outside of a live cell for vary amount of time .
for example , a study that look at the ability of influenza virus to infect a cell culture after vary amount of time on a banknote show survival time from four  eight hour to one  seven day , depend on how - pron - be deposit on the banknote . [ eight ]
on the other hand , cold - cause rhinovirus be somewhat fragile , typically survive less than a day outside of physiological fluid .
a human act as a reservoir of a pathogen may or may not be capable of transmit the pathogen , depend on the stage of infection and the pathogen .
to help prevent the spread of disease among school child , the cdc have develop guideline base on the risk of transmission during the course of the disease .
for example , child with chickenpox be consider contagious for five day from the start of the rash , whereas child with most gastrointestinal illness should be keep home for two  four hour after the symptom disappear .
eight .
yves thomas , guido vogel , werner wunderli , patricia suter , mark witschi , daniel koch , caroline tapparel , and laurent kaiser .
“
survival of influenza virus on banknotes .
"
applied and environmental microbiology seven  four , no .
one  zero ( two  zero  zero  eight ) 
three  zero  zero  two – three  zero  zero  seven . seven  one  six chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five an individual capable of transmit a pathogen without display symptom be refer to as a carrier .
a passive carrier be contaminate with the pathogen and can mechanically transmit - pron - to another host  however , a passive carrier be not infect .
for example , a health - care professional who fail to wash - pron - hand after see a patient harbor an infectious agent could become a passive carrier , transmit the pathogen to another patient who become infected .
by contrast , an active carrier be an infected individual who can transmit the disease to other .
an active carrier may or may not exhibit sign or symptom of infection .
for example , active carrier may transmit the disease during the incubation period ( before - pron - show sign and symptom ) or the period of convalescence ( after symptom have subside ) .
active carrier who do not present sign or symptom of disease despite infection be call asymptomatic carrier .
pathogen such as hepatitis b virus , herpe simplex virus , and hiv be frequently transmit by asymptomatic carrier .
mary mallon , better know as typhoid mary , be a famous historical example of an asymptomatic carrier .
an irish immigrant , mallon work as a cook for household in and around new york city between one  nine  zero  zero and one  nine  one  five .
in each household , the resident develop typhoid fever ( cause by salmonella typhi ) a few week after mallon start work .
later investigation determine that mallon be responsible for at least one  two  two case of typhoid fever , five of which be fatal . [ nine ] see eye on ethics  typhoid mary for more about the mallon case .
a pathogen may have more than one live reservoir .
in zoonotic disease , animal act as reservoir of human disease and transmit the infectious agent to human through direct or indirect contact .
in some case , the disease also affect the animal , but in other case the animal be asymptomatic .
in parasitic infection , the parasite 's preferred host be call the definitive host .
in parasite with complex life cycle , the definitive host be the host in which the parasite reach sexual maturity .
some parasite may also infect one or more intermediate host in which the parasite go through several immature life cycle stage or reproduce asexually .
george soper , the sanitary engineer who trace the typhoid outbreak to mary mallon , give an account ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two geosopcurtyp ) of - pron - investigation , an example of descriptive epidemiology , in “
the curious career of typhoid mary .
"

list some nonlive reservoir for pathogen .

explain the difference between a passive carrier and an active carrier .
transmission regardless of the reservoir , transmission must occur for an infection to spread .
first , transmission from the reservoir to the individual must occur .
then , the individual must transmit the infectious agent to other susceptible individual , either directly or indirectly .
pathogenic microorganism employ diverse transmission mechanism .
link to learning nine .
filio marineli , gregory tsoucalas , marianna karamanou , and george androutsos .
“
mary mallon ( one  eight  six  nine – one  nine  three  eight ) and the history of typhoid fever .
"
annals of gastroenterology two  six ( two  zero  one  three )
 one  three  two – one  three  four .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / pmc three  nine  five  nine  nine  four  zero  / pdf / anngastroenterol -  two  six - one  three  two  . pdf .
chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  one  seven contact transmission contact transmission include direct contact or indirect contact .
person - to - person transmission be a form of direct contact transmission .
here the agent be transmit by physical contact between two individual ( figure one  six  .  nine ) through action such as touching , kiss , sexual intercourse , or droplet spray .
direct contact can be categorize as vertical , horizontal , or droplet transmission .
vertical direct contact transmission occur when pathogen be transmit from mother to child during pregnancy , birth , or breastfeed .
other kind of direct contact transmission be call horizontal direct contact transmission .
often , contact between mucous membrane be require for entry of the pathogen into the new host , although skin - to - skin contact can lead to mucous membrane contact if the new host subsequently touch a mucous membrane .
contact transmission may also be site - specific  for example , some disease can be transmit by sexual contact but not by other form of contact .
when an individual cough or sneeze , small droplet of mucus that may contain pathogen be eject .
this lead to direct droplet transmission , which refer to droplet transmission of a pathogen to a new host over distance of one meter or less .
a wide variety of disease be transmit by droplet , include influenza and many form of pneumonia .
transmission over distance great than one meter be call airborne transmission .
indirect contact transmission involve inanimate object call fomite that become contaminate by pathogen from an infected individual or reservoir ( figure one  six  .  one  zero ) .
for example , an individual with the common cold may sneeze , cause droplet to land on a fomite such as a tablecloth or carpet , or the individual may wipe - pron - nose and then transfer mucus to a fomite such as a doorknob or towel .
transmission occur indirectly when a new susceptible host later touch the fomite and transfer the contaminated material to a susceptible portal of entry .
fomite can also include object use in clinical setting that be not properly sterilize , such as syrinx , needle , catheter , and surgical equipment .
pathogens transmit indirectly via such fomite be a major cause of healthcare - associate infection ( see control microbial growth ) .
figure one  six  .  nine direct contact transmission of pathogen can occur through physical contact .
many pathogen require contact with a mucous membrane to enter the body , but the host may transfer the pathogen from another point of contact ( e . g . , hand ) to a mucous membrane ( e . g . , mouth or eye ) .
( credit leave  modification of work by lisa doehnert ) figure one  six  .  one  zero
fomite be nonlive object that facilitate the indirect transmission of pathogen .
contaminated doorknob , towel , and syrinx be all common example of fomite .
( credit leave  modification of work by kate ter haar  credit middle  modification of work by vernon swanepoel  credit right 
modification of work by “ zaldylmg” / flickr ) seven  one  eight chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five vehicle transmission
the term vehicle transmission refer to the transmission of pathogen through vehicle such as water , food , and air .
water contamination through poor sanitation method lead to waterborne transmission of disease .
waterborne disease remain a serious problem in many region throughout the world .
the world health organization ( who ) estimate that contaminate drinking water be responsible for more than five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death each year . [ one  zero ]
similarly , food contaminate through poor handling or storage can lead to foodborne transmission of disease ( figure one  six  .  one  one ) .
dust and fine particle know as aerosol , which can float in the air , can carry pathogen and facilitate the airborne transmission of disease .
for example , dust particle be the dominant mode of transmission of hantavirus to human .
hantavirus be find in mouse fece , urine , and saliva , but when these substance dry , - pron - can disintegrate into fine particle that can become airborne when disturbed  inhalation of these particle can lead to a serious and sometimes fatal respiratory infection .
although droplet transmission over short distance be consider contact transmission as discuss above , long distance transmission of droplet through the air be consider vehicle transmission .
unlike large particle that drop quickly out of the air column , fine mucus droplet produce by cough or sneeze can remain suspend for long period of time , travel considerable distance .
in certain condition , droplet desiccate quickly to produce a droplet nucleus that be capable of transmit pathogen  air temperature and humidity can have an impact on effectiveness of airborne transmission .
tuberculosis be often transmit via airborne transmission when the causative agent , mycobacterium tuberculosis , be release in small particle with cough .
because tuberculosis require as few as one  zero microbe to initiate a new infection , patient with tuberculosis must be treat in room equip with special ventilation , and anyone enter the room should wear a mask .
figure
one  six  .  one  one food be an important vehicle of transmission for pathogen , especially of the gastrointestinal and upper respiratory system .
notice the glass shield above the food tray , design to prevent pathogen eject in cough and sneeze from enter the food .
( credit  fort george g . meade public affairs office )
resolution
after identify the source of the contaminate turducken , the florida public health office notify the cdc , which request an expedite inspection of the facility by state inspector .
inspector find that a machine use to process the chicken be contaminate with salmonella as a result of substandard cleaning protocol .
inspector also find that the process of stuff and package the turducken prior to refrigeration allow the meat to remain at temperature conducive to bacterial growth for too long .
the contamination and the clinical focus one  zero .
world health organization .
fact sheet no .
three  nine  one -drinking water .
june two  zero  zero  five .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheets / fs three  nine  one  / en .
chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  one  nine delay refrigeration lead to vehicle ( food ) transmission of the bacteria in turducken .
base on these finding , the plant be shut down for a full and thorough decontamination .
all turducken produce in the plant be recall and pull from store shelf ahead of the december holiday season , prevent further outbreak .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
vector transmission diseases can also be transmit by a mechanical or biological vector , an animal ( typically an arthropod ) that carry the disease from one host to another .
mechanical transmission be facilitate by a mechanical vector , an animal that carry a pathogen from one host to another without be infect - pron - .
for example , a fly may land on fecal matter and later transmit bacteria from the fece to food that - pron - land on  a human eat the food may then become infect by the bacteria , result in a case of diarrhea or dysentery ( figure one  six  .  one  two ) .
biological transmission occur when the pathogen reproduce within a biological vector that transmit the pathogen from one host to another ( figure one  six  .  one  two ) .
arthropod be the main vector responsible for biological transmission ( figure one  six  .  one  three ) .
most arthropod vector transmit the pathogen by bite the host , create a wound that serve as a portal of entry .
the pathogen may go through part of - pron - reproductive cycle in the gut or salivary gland of the arthropod to facilitate - pron - transmission through the bite .
for example , hemipteran ( call " kiss bug " or " assassin bug " ) transmit chagas disease to human by defecate when - pron - bite , after which the human scratch or rub the infect fece into a mucous membrane or break in the skin .
biological insect vector include mosquito , which transmit malaria and other disease , and lice , which transmit typhus .
other arthropod vector can include arachnid , primarily tick , which transmit lyme disease and other disease , and mite , which transmit scrub typhus and rickettsial pox .
biological transmission , because - pron - involve survival and reproduction within a parasitized vector , complicate the biology of the pathogen and - pron - transmission .
there be also important non - arthropod vector of disease , include mammal and bird .
various specie of mammal can transmit rabie to human , usually by mean of a bite that transmit the rabie virus .
chicken and other domestic poultry can transmit avian influenza to human through direct or indirect contact with avian influenza virus a shed in the bird ' saliva , mucous , and fece .
seven  two  zero chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  six  .  one  two ( a )
a mechanical vector carry a pathogen on - pron - body from one host to another , not as an infection .
( b )
a biological vector carry a pathogen from one host to another after become infect - pron - .
chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology seven  two  one figure one  six  .  one  three
( credit “ black fly " ,
“ tick "
, “ tsetse fly " 
modification of work by usda  credit 
"
flea " 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit 
“ louse " ,
“ mosquito " ,
“ sand fly
"
 modification of work by james gathany , centers for disease control and prevention  credit “
kiss bug " 
modification of work by glenn seplak  credit "
mite " 
modification of work by michael wunderli ) seven  two  two chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 describe
how disease can be transmit through the air .

explain the difference between a mechanical vector and a biological vector .
use gmo to stop the spread of zika
in two  zero  one  six , an epidemic of the zika virus be link to a high incidence of birth defect in south america and central america .
as winter turn to spring in the northern hemisphere , health official correctly predict the virus would spread to north america , coincide with the breeding season of - pron - major vector , the aedes aegypti mosquito .
the range of the a . aegypti mosquito extend well into the southern united states ( figure one  six  .  one  four ) .
because these same mosquito serve as vector for other problematic disease ( dengue fever , yellow fever , and other ) , various method of mosquito control have be propose as solution .
chemical pesticide have be use effectively in the past , and be likely to be use again  but because chemical pesticide can have negative impact on the environment , some scientist have propose an alternative that involve genetically engineer a . aegypti so that - pron - can not reproduce .
this method , however , have be the subject of some controversy .
one method that have work in the past to control pest , with little apparent downside , have be sterile male introduction .
this method control the screw - worm fly pest in the southwest united states and fruit fly pest of fruit crop .
in this method , male of the target specie be rear in the lab , sterilize with radiation , and release into the environment where - pron - mate with wild female , who subsequently bear no live offspring .
repeat release shrink the p population .
a similar method , take advantage of recombinant dna technology , [ one  one ] introduce a dominant lethal allele into male mosquito that be suppress in the presence of tetracycline ( an antibiotic ) during laboratory rear .
the male be release into the environment and mate with female mosquito .
unlike the sterile male method , these mating produce offspring , but - pron - die as larvae from the lethal gene in the absence of tetracycline in the environment .
as of two  zero  one  six , this method have yet to be implement in the united states , but a uk company test the method in piracicaba , brazil , and find an eight  two % reduction in wild a . aegypti larvae and a nine  one % reduction in dengue case in the treat area . [ one  two ]
in august two  zero  one  six , amid news of zika infection in several florida community , the fda give the uk company permission to test this same mosquito control method in key west , florida , pende compliance with local and state regulation and a referendum in the affect community .
the use of genetically modify organism ( gmos ) to control a disease vector have - pron - advocate as well as - pron - opponent .
in theory , the system could be use to drive the a . aegypti mosquito extinct - a noble goal accord to some , give the damage - pron - do to human populations . [ one  three ]
but opponent of the idea be concerned that the gene could escape the specie boundary of a . aegypti and cause problem in other specie , lead to unforeseen ecological consequence .
opponent be also wary of the program because - pron - be be administer by a for - profit corporation , create the potential for conflict of interest that would have to be tightly regulate  and - pron - be not clear how any unintended consequence of the program could be reverse .
there be other epidemiological consideration as well .
aedes aegypti be apparently not the only vector for the zika virus .
aedes albopictus , the asian tiger mosquito , be also a vector for the zika virus . [ one  four ] a . albopictus be now widespread around the planet include much of the united states ( figure one  six  .  one  four ) .
many other mosquito eye on ethics chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  two  three have be find to harbor zika virus , though - pron - capacity to act as vector be unknown . [ one  five ] genetically modify strain of a . aegypti will not control the other specie of vector .
finally , the zika virus can apparently be transmit sexually between human host , from mother to child , and possibly through blood transfusion .
all of these factor must be consider in any approach to control the spread of the virus .
clearly there be risk and unknown involve in conduct an open - environment experiment of an as - yet poorly understand technology .
but allow the zika virus to spread unchecked be also risky .
do the threat of a zika epidemic justify the ecological risk of genetically engineering mosquito ?
be current method of mosquito control sufficiently ineffective or harmful that - pron - need to try untested alternative ?
these be the question be put to public health official now .
figure one  six  .  one  four
the zika virus be an envelop virus transmit by mosquito , especially aedes aegypti .
the range of this mosquito include much of the united states , from the southwest and southeast to as far north as the mid - atlantic .
the range of a . albopictus , another vector , extend even farther north to new england and part of the midwest .
( credit micrograph  modification of work by cynthia goldsmith , centers for disease control and prevention  credit photo  modification of work by james gathany , centers for disease control and prevention 
credit map  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
quarantining individuals suspect or know to have be expose to certain contagious pathogen may be quarantine , or one  one .
blandine massonnet - bruneel , nicole corre - catelin , renaud lacroix , rosemary s . lees , kim phuc hoang , derric nimmo , luke alphey , and paul reiter .
“
fitness of transgenic mosquito aedes aegypti males carry a dominant lethal genetic system .
"
plos one eight , no . five ( two  zero  one  three )  e six  two  seven  one  one . one  two .
richard levine .
“
case of dengue drop nine  one percent due to genetically modify mosquitoes .
"
entomology today .
https / / entomologytoday . org /  two  zero  one  six  /  zero  seven  /  one  four  / cases - of - dengue - drop -  nine  one  - due - to - genetically - modified - mosquitoe .
one  three .
olivia judson .
“
a bug 's death .
"
the new york times , september two  five , two  zero  zero  three .
http / / www . nytimes . com /  two  zero  zero  three  /  zero  nine  /  two  five  / opinion / a - bug - sdeath .
html .
one  four .
gilda grard , mélanie caron , illich manfred mombo , dieudonné nkoghe , statiana mboui ondo , davy jiolle , didier fontenille , christophe paupy , and eric maurice leroy .
“
zika virus in gabon
( central africa ) – two  zero  zero  seven 
a new threat from aedes albopictus ?
" plos neglect tropical diseases eight , no .
two ( two  zero  one  four )  e two  six  eight  one .
one  five .
constância f . j . ayres .
“
identification of zika virus vectors and implications for control .
"
the lancet infectious diseases one  six , no . three ( two  zero  one  six )  two  seven  eight – two  seven  nine .
seven  two  four chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five isolate to prevent transmission of the disease to other .
hospital and other health - care facility generally set up special ward to isolate patient with particularly hazardous disease such as tuberculosis or ebola
( figure one  six  .  one  five ) .
depend on the setting , these ward may be equip with special air - handle method , and personnel may implement special protocol to limit the risk of transmission , such as personal protective equipment or the use of chemical disinfectant spray upon entry and exit of medical personnel .
the duration of the quarantine depend on factor such as the incubation period of the disease and the evidence suggestive of an infection .
the patient may be release if sign and symptom fail to materialize when expect or if preventive treatment can be administer in order to limit the risk of transmission .
if the infection be confirm , the patient may be compel to remain in isolation until the disease be no longer consider contagious .
in the united states , public health authority may only quarantine patient for certain disease , such as cholera , diphtheria , infectious tuberculosis , and strain of influenza capable of cause a pandemic .
individual enter the united states or move between state may be quarantine by the cdc if - pron - be suspect of have be expose to one of these disease .
although the cdc routinely monitor entry point to the united states for crew or passenger display illness , quarantine be rarely implement .
figure one  six  .  one  five ( a )
the aeromedical biological containment system ( abcs ) be a module design by the cdc and department of defense specifically for transport highly contagious patient by air .
( b )
an isolation ward for ebola patient in lagos , nigeria .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by cdc global )
healthcare - associated ( nosocomial ) infections hospitals , retirement home , and prison attract the attention of epidemiologist because these setting be associate with increase incidence of certain disease .
high rate of transmission may be cause by characteristic of the environment - pron - , characteristic of the population , or both .
consequently , special effort must be take to limit the risk of infection in these setting .
infection acquire in health - care facility , include hospital , be call nosocomial infection or healthcareassociate infection ( hai ) .
hai be often connect with surgery or other invasive procedure that provide the pathogen with access to the portal of infection .
for an infection to be classify as an hai , the patient must have be admit to the health - care facility for a reason other than the infection .
in these setting , patient suffer from primary disease be often afflict with compromise immunity and be more susceptible to secondary infection and opportunistic pathogen .
in two  zero  one  one , more than seven  two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero hai occur in hospital in the united states , accord to the cdc .
about two  two % of these hai occur at a surgical site , and case of pneumonia account for another two  two %  urinary tract infection account for an additional one  three % , and primary bloodstream infection one  zero % . [ one  six ]
such hai often occur when one  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ hai data and statistics .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / hai / surveillance .
accessed jan two , chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  two  five pathogen be introduce to patient ' body through contaminate surgical or medical equipment , such as catheter and respiratory ventilator .
health - care facility seek to limit nosocomial infection through training and hygiene protocol such as those describe in control of microbial growth .

give some reason why hai occur .
one  six  .  four global public health learning objectives

describe the entity involve in international public health and - pron - activity  identify and differentiate between emerge and reemerge infectious disease
a large number of international program and agency be involve in effort to promote global public health .
among - pron - goal be develop infrastructure in health care , public sanitation , and public health capacity  monitor infectious disease occurrence around the world  coordinate communication between national public health agency in various country  and coordinate international response to major health crisis .
in large part , these international effort be necessary because disease - cause microorganism know no national boundary .
the world health organization ( who )
international public health issue be coordinate by the world health organization ( who ) , an agency of the united nations .
of - pron - roughly $ four billion budget for two  zero  one  five – one  six [ one  seven ] , about $ one billion be fund by member state and the remain $ three billion by voluntary contribution .
in addition to monitor and report on infectious disease , who also develop and implement strategy for - pron - control and prevention .
who have have a number of successful international public health campaign .
for example , - pron - vaccination program against smallpox , begin in the mid -  one  nine  six  zero , result in the global eradication of the disease by one  nine  eight  zero .
who continue to be involve in infectious disease control , primarily in the develop world , with program target malaria , hiv / aids , and tuberculosis , among other .
- pron - also run program to reduce illness and mortality that occur as a result of violence , accident , lifestyle - associate illness such as diabetes , and poor health - care infrastructure .
who maintain a global alert and response system that coordinate information from member nation .
in the event of a public health emergency or epidemic , - pron - provide logistical support and coordinate international response to the emergency .
the united states contribute to this effort through the cdc .
the cdc carry out international monitoring and public health effort , mainly in the service of protect us public health in an increasingly connected world .
similarly , the european union maintain a health security committee that monitor disease outbreak within - pron - member country and internationally , coordinate with who .

name the organization that participate in international public health monitoring .
two  zero  one  six .
one  seven .
world health organization .
“
programme budget two  zero  one  four – two  zero  one  five .
"
http / / www . who . int / about / finances - accountability / budget / en .
seven  two  six chapter one  six  disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five emerge and reemerge infectious diseases
both who and some national public health agency such as the cdc monitor and prepare for emerge infectious disease .
an emerge infectious disease be either new to the human population or have show an increase in prevalence in the previous twenty year .
whether the disease be new or condition have change to cause an increase in frequency , - pron - status as emerge imply the need to apply resource to understand and control - pron - grow impact .
emerge disease may change - pron - frequency gradually over time , or - pron - may experience sudden epidemic growth .
the importance of vigilance be make clear during the ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in western africa through two  zero  one  four – two  zero  one  five .
although health expert have be aware of the ebola virus since the one  nine  seven  zero , an outbreak on such a large scale have never happen before ( figure one  six  .  one  six ) .
previous human epidemic have be small , isolated , and contain .
indeed , the gorilla and chimpanzee population of western africa have suffer far bad from ebola than the human population .
the pattern of small isolate human epidemic change in two  zero  one  four .
- pron - high transmission rate , couple with cultural practice for treatment of the dead and perhaps - pron - emergence in an urban setting , cause the disease to spread rapidly , and thousand of people die .
the international public health community respond with a large emergency effort to treat patient and contain the epidemic .
emerge disease be find in all country , both develop and develop ( table one  six  .  two ) .
some nation be better equip to deal with - pron - .
national and international public health agency watch for epidemic like the ebola outbreak in develop country because those country rarely have the health - care infrastructure and expertise to deal with large outbreak effectively .
even with the support of international agency , the system in western africa struggle to identify and care for the sick and control spread .
in addition to the altruistic goal of save life and assist nation lack in resource , the global nature of transportation mean that an outbreak anywhere can spread quickly to every corner of the planet .
manage an epidemic in one location - - pron - source - be far easy than fight - pron - on many front .
ebola be not the only disease that need to be monitor in the global environment .
in two  zero  one  five , who set priority on several emerge disease that have a high probability of cause epidemic and that be poorly understand ( and thus urgently require research and development effort ) .
a reemerge infectious disease be a disease that be increase in frequency after a previous period of decline .
- pron - reemergence may be a result of change condition or old prevention regime that be no longer work .
example of such disease be drug - resistant form of tuberculosis , bacterial pneumonia , and malaria .
drug - resistant strain of the bacteria cause gonorrhea and syphilis be also become more widespread , raise concern of untreatable infection .
chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  two  seven figure one  six  .  one  six
even before the ebola epidemic of two  zero  one  four – one  five , ebola be consider an emerge disease because of several small outbreak between the mid -  one  nine  nine  zero and two  zero  zero  zero .
some emerging and reemerge infectious diseases disease pathogen year discovered affected regions transmission aids
hiv one  nine  eight  one
worldwide contact with infect body fluid chikungunya fever chikungunya virus one  nine  five  two africa , asia , india  spread to europe and the americas mosquito - borne ebola virus disease ebola virus
one  nine  seven  six central and western africa contact with infect body fluid h one n one influenza ( swine flu )
h one n one virus two  zero  zero  nine worldwide droplet transmission lyme disease borrelia burgdorferi bacterium
one  nine  eight  one northern hemisphere from mammal reservoir to human by tick vector west nile virus disease west nile virus
one  nine  three  seven africa , australia , canada to venezuela , europe , middle east , western asia mosquito - borne table one  six  .  two seven  two  eight chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  explain why - pron - be important to monitor emerge infectious disease .

explain how a bacterial disease could reemerge , even if - pron - have previously be successfully treat and control .
sars outbreak and identification
on november one  six , two  zero  zero  two , the first case of a sars outbreak be report in guangdong province , china .
the patient exhibit influenza - like symptom such as fever , cough , myalgia , sore throat , and shortness of breath .
as the number of case grow , the chinese government be reluctant to openly communicate information about the epidemic with the world health organization ( who ) and the international community .
the slow reaction of chinese public health official to this new disease contribute to the spread of the epidemic within and later outside china .
in april two  zero  zero  three , the chinese government finally respond with a huge public health effort involve quarantine , medical checkpoint , and massive cleaning project .
over one  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero people be quarantine in beijing alone .
large funding initiative be create to improve health - care facility , and dedicated outbreak team be create to coordinate the response .
by august one  six , two  zero  zero  three , the last sars patient be release from a hospital in beijing nine month after the first case be report in china .
in the meantime , sars spread to other country on - pron - way to become a global pandemic .
though the infectious agent have yet to be identify , - pron - be think to be an influenza virus .
the disease be name sars , an acronym for severe acute respiratory syndrome , until the etiologic agent could be identify .
travel restriction to southeast asia be enforce by many country .
by the end of the outbreak , there be eight  ,  zero  nine  eight case and seven  seven  four death worldwide .
china and hong kong be hit hardest by the epidemic , but taiwan , singapore , and toronto , canada , also see significant number of case .
fortunately , timely public health response in many country effectively suppress the outbreak and lead to - pron - eventual containment .
for example , the disease be introduce to canada in february two  zero  zero  three by an infected traveler from hong kong , who die shortly after be hospitalize .
by the end of march , hospital isolation and home quarantine procedure be in place in the toronto area , stringent anti - infection protocol be introduce in hospital , and the medium be actively report on the disease .
public health official track down contact of infect individual and quarantine - pron - .
a total of two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero individual be quarantine in the city .
thank to the vigorous response of the canadian public health community , sars be bring under control in toronto by june , a mere four month after - pron - be introduce .
in two  zero  zero  three , who establish a collaborative effort to identify the causative agent of sars , which have now be identify as a coronavirus that be associate with horseshoe bat .
the genome of the sars virus be sequence and publish by researcher at the cdc and in canada in may two  zero  zero  three , and in the same month researcher in the netherlands confirm the etiology of the disease by fulfil koch 's postulate for the sars coronavirus .
the last know case of sars worldwide be report in two  zero  zero  four .
micro connections chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology seven  two  nine
this database ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two dataoutinfdis ) of report chronicle outbreak of infectious disease around the world .
- pron - be on this system that the first information about the sars outbreak in china emerge .
the cdc publish emerge infectious diseases ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two cdcemerinfdis ) , a monthly journal available online .
summary one  six  .  one
the language of epidemiologists  epidemiology be the science underlie public health .

morbidity mean be in a state of illness , whereas mortality refer to death  both morbidity rate and mortality rate be of interest to epidemiologist .

incidence be the number of new case ( morbidity or mortality ) , usually express as a proportion , during a specified time period  prevalence be the total number affect in the population , again usually express as a proportion .
 sporadic disease only occur rarely and largely without a geographic focus .
endemic disease occur at a constant ( and often low ) level within a population .
epidemic disease and pandemic disease occur when an outbreak occur on a significantly large than expect level , either locally or globally , respectively .

koch 's postulate specify the procedure for confirm a particular pathogen as the etiologic agent of a particular disease .
koch 's postulate have limitation in application if the microbe can not be isolate and culture or if there be no animal host for the microbe .
in this case , molecular koch 's postulate would be utilize .

in the united states , the centers for disease control and prevention monitor notifiable disease and publish weekly update in the morbidity and mortality weekly report .
one  six  .  two
track infectious diseases

early pioneer of epidemiology such as john snow , florence nightingale , and joseph lister , study disease at the population level and use datum to disrupt disease transmission .

descriptive epidemiology study rely on case analysis and patient history to gain information about outbreak , frequently while - pron - be still occur .

retrospective epidemiology study use historical datum to identify association with the disease state of present case .
prospective epidemiology study gather datum and follow case to find association with future disease state .
 analytical epidemiology study be observational study that be carefully design to compare group and uncover association between environmental or genetic factor and disease .
 experimental epidemiology study generate strong evidence of causation in disease or treatment by manipulate subject and compare - pron - with control subject .
one  six  .  three modes of disease transmission 
reservoir of human disease can include the human and animal population , soil , water , and inanimate object or material .

contact transmission can be direct or indirect through physical contact with either an infected host ( direct ) or contact with a fomite that an infected host have make contact with previously ( indirect ) .

vector transmission occur when a live organism carry an infectious agent on - pron - body ( mechanical ) or as an infection host - pron - ( biological ) , to a new host .
link to learn seven  three  zero chapter one  six
 disease and epidemiology
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
vehicle transmission occur when a substance , such as soil , water , or air , carry an infectious agent to a new host .
 healthcare - associate infection ( hai ) , or nosocomial infection , be acquire in a clinical setting .
transmission be facilitate by medical intervention and the high concentration of susceptible , immunocompromised individual in clinical setting .
one  six  .  four global public health

the world health organization ( who ) be an agency of the united nations that collect and analyze datum on disease occurrence from member nation .
who also coordinate public health program and response to international health emergency .

emerge disease be those that be new to human population or that have be increase in the past two decade .
reemerge disease be those that be make a resurgence in susceptible population after previously have be control in some geographic area .
chapter one  seven innate nonspecific host defenses figure one  seven  .  one varicella , or chickenpox , be cause by the highly contagious varicella - zoster virus .
the characteristic rash see here be partly a result of inflammation associate with the body 's immune response to the virus .
inflammation be a response mechanism of innate immunity that help the body fight off a wide range of infection .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) chapter outline one  seven  .  one physical defenses one  seven  .  two chemical defenses
one  seven  .  three cellular defenses one  seven  .  four pathogen recognition and phagocytosis one  seven  .  five inflammation and fever introduction despite relatively constant exposure to pathogenic microbe in the environment , human do not generally suffer from constant infection or disease .
under most circumstance , the body be able to defend - pron - from the threat of infection thank to a complex immune system design to repel , kill , and expel disease - cause invader .
immunity as a whole can be describe as two interrelated part  nonspecific innate immunity , which be the subject of this chapter , and specific adaptive host defense , which be discuss in the next chapter .
the nonspecific innate immune response provide a first line of defense that can often prevent infection from gain a solid foothold in the body .
these defense be describe as nonspecific because - pron - do not target any specific pathogen  rather , - pron - defend against a wide range of potential pathogen .
- pron - be call innate because - pron - be build - in mechanism of the human organism .
unlike the specific adaptive defense , - pron - be not acquire over time and - pron - have no “ memory "
( - pron - do not improve after repeat exposure to specific pathogen ) .
broadly speak , nonspecific innate defense provide an immediate ( or very rapid ) response against potential pathogen .
however , these response be neither perfect nor impenetrable .
- pron - can be circumvent by pathogen on occasion , and sometimes - pron - can even cause damage to the body , contribute to the sign and symptom of chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  three  five infection ( figure one  seven  .  one ) .
one  seven  .  one physical defenses learning objectives
 describe the various physical barrier and mechanical defense that protect the human body against infection and disease
 describe the role of microbiota as a first - line defense against infection and disease
nonspecific innate immunity can be characterize as a multifaceted system of defense that target invade pathogen in a nonspecific manner .
in this chapter , - pron - have divide the numerous defense that make up this system into three category  physical defense , chemical defense , and cellular defense .
however , - pron - be important to keep in mind that these defense do not function independently , and the category often overlap .
table one  seven  .  one provide an overview of the nonspecific defense discuss in this chapter .
overview of nonspecific innate immune defenses physical barrier physical defense
mechanical defense microbiome chemicals and enzyme in body fluid antimicrobial peptide plasma protein mediator cytokines chemical defense inflammation - elicit mediator
granulocyte cellular defense agranulocytes table
one  seven  .  one physical defense provide the body 's most basic form of nonspecific defense .
- pron - include physical barrier to part one angela , a two  five  - year - old female patient in the emergency department , be have some trouble communicate verbally because of shortness of breath .
a nurse observe constriction and swelling of the airway and labored breathing .
the nurse ask angela if - pron - have a history of asthma or allergy .
angela shake - pron - head no , but there be fear in - pron - eye .
with some difficulty , - pron - explain that - pron - father die suddenly at age two  seven , when - pron - be just a little girl , of a similar respiratory attack .
the underlie cause have never be identify .

what be some possible cause of constriction and swelling of the airway ?

what cause swell of body tissue in general ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus seven  three  six chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five microbe , such as the skin and mucous membrane , as well as mechanical defense that physically remove microbe and debris from area of the body where - pron - may cause harm or infection .
in addition , the microbiome provide a measure of physical protection against disease , as microbe of the normal microbiota compete with pathogen for nutrient and cellular bind site necessary to cause infection .
physical barriers physical barrier play an important role in prevent microbe from reach tissue that be susceptible to infection .
at the cellular level , barrier consist of cell that be tightly join to prevent invader from cross through to deep tissue .
for example , the endothelial cell that line blood vessel have very tight cell - to - cell junction , block microbe from gain access to the bloodstream .
cell junction be generally compose of cell membrane protein that may connect with the extracellular matrix or with complementary protein from neighboring cell .
tissue in various part of the body have different type of cell junction .
these include tight junction , desmosome , and gap junction , as illustrate in figure one  seven  .  two .
invade microorganism may attempt to break down these substance chemically , use enzyme such as protease that can cause structural damage to create a point of entry for pathogen .
figure one  seven  .  two there be multiple type of cell junction in human tissue , three of which be show here .
tight junction rivet two adjacent cell together , prevent or limit material exchange through the space between - pron - .
desmosome have intermediate fiber that act like shoelace , tie two cell together , allow small material to pass through the result space .
gap junction be channel between two cell that permit - pron - communication via signal .
( credit  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal )
the skin barrier one of the body 's
most important physical barrier be the skin barrier , which be compose of three layer of closely packed cell .
the thin upper layer be call the epidermis .
a second , thick layer , call the dermis , contain hair follicle , sweat gland , nerve , and blood vessel .
a layer of fatty tissue call the hypodermis lie beneath the dermis and contain blood and lymph vessel ( figure one  seven  .  three ) .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host
defenses seven  three  seven figure one  seven  .  three human skin have three layer , the epidermis , the dermis , and the hypodermis , which provide a thick barrier between microbe outside the body and deep tissue .
dead skin cell on the surface of the epidermis be continually shed , take with - pron - microbe on the skin 's surface .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes of health )
the topmost layer of skin , the epidermis , consist of cell that be pack with keratin .
these dead cell remain as a tightly connect , dense layer of protein - fill cell husk on the surface of the skin .
the keratin make the skin 's surface mechanically tough and resistant to degradation by bacterial enzyme .
fatty acid on the skin 's surface create a dry , salty , and acidic environment that inhibit the growth of some microbe and be highly resistant to breakdown by bacterial enzyme .
in addition , the dead cell of the epidermis be frequently shed , along with any microbe that may be cling to - pron - .
shed skin cell be continually replace with new cell from below , provide a new barrier that will soon be shed in the same way .
infection can occur when the skin barrier be compromise or break .
a wound can serve as a point of entry for opportunistic pathogen , which can infect the skin tissue surround the wound and possibly spread to deep tissue .
every rose have - pron - thorn mike , a gardener from southern california , recently notice a small red bump on - pron - left forearm .
initially , - pron - do not think much of - pron - , but soon - pron - grow large and then ulcerated ( open up ) , become a painful lesion that extend across a large part of - pron - forearm ( figure one  seven  .  four ) .
- pron - go to an urgent care facility , where a physician ask about - pron - occupation .
when - pron - say - pron - be a landscaper , the physician immediately suspect a case of sporotrichosis , a type of fungal infection know as rise gardener 's disease because - pron - often afflict landscaper and gardening enthusiast .
under most condition , fungi can not produce skin infection in healthy individual .
fungi grow filament know as hypha , which be not particularly invasive and can be easily keep at bay by the physical barrier of the skin and mucous membrane .
however , small wound in the skin , such as those cause by thorn , can provide an opening for opportunistic pathogen like sporothrix schenkii , a soil - dwell fungus and the causative agent of rose gardener 's disease .
once - pron - breach the skin barrier , s . schenkii can infect the skin and underlie tissue , produce ulcerated lesion like mike 's .
compound matter , other pathogen may enter the infect case in point seven  three  eight chapter one  seven

innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five tissue , cause secondary bacterial infection .
luckily , rise gardener 's disease be treatable .
mike 's physician write - pron - a prescription for some antifungal drug as well as a course of antibiotic to combat secondary bacterial infection .
- pron - lesion eventually heal , and mike return to work with a new appreciation for glove and protective clothing .
figure one  seven  .  four
rose gardener 's disease can occur when the fungus sporothrix schenkii breach the skin through small cut , such as may be inflict by thorn .
( credit leave  modification of work by elisa self  credit right 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
mucous membranes
the mucous membrane line the nose , mouth , lung , and urinary and digestive tract provide another nonspecific barrier against potential pathogen .
mucous membrane consist of a layer of epithelial cell bind by tight junction .
the epithelial cell secrete a moist , sticky substance call mucus , which cover and protect the more fragile cell layer beneath - pron - and trap debris and particulate matter , include microbe .
mucus secretion also contain antimicrobial peptide .
in many region of the body , mechanical action serve to flush mucus ( along with trapped or dead microbe ) out of the body or away from potential site of infection .
for example , in the respiratory system , inhalation can bring microbe , dust , mold spore , and other small airborne debris into the body .
this debris become trap in the mucus line the respiratory tract , a layer know as the mucociliary blanket .
the epithelial cell line the upper part of the respiratory tract be call ciliate epithelial cell because - pron - have hair - like appendage know as cilia .
movement of the cilia propel debris - laden mucus out and away from the lung .
the expel mucus be then swallow and destroy in the stomach , or cough up , or sneeze out ( figure one  seven  .  five ) .
this system of removal be often call the mucociliary escalator .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  three  nine figure one  seven  .  five
this scan electron micrograph show ciliate and nonciliate epithelial cell from the human trachea .
the mucociliary escalator push mucus away from the lung , along with any debris or microorganism that may be trap in the sticky mucus , and the mucus move up to the esophagus where - pron - can be remove by swallow .
the mucociliary escalator be such an effective barrier to microbe that the lung , the lowermost ( and most sensitive ) portion of the respiratory tract , be long consider to be a sterile environment in healthy individual .
only recently have research suggest that healthy lung may have a small normal microbiota .
disruption of the mucociliary escalator by the damaging effect of smoking or disease such as cystic fibrosis can lead to increase colonization of bacteria in the low respiratory tract and frequent infection , which highlight the importance of this physical barrier to host defense .
like the respiratory tract , the digestive tract be a portal of entry through which microbe enter the body , and the mucous membrane line the digestive tract provide a nonspecific physical barrier against ingested microbe .
the intestinal tract be line with epithelial cell , intersperse with mucus - secrete goblet cell ( figure one  seven  .  six ) .
this mucus mix with material receive from the stomach , trap foodborne microbe and debris .
the mechanical action of peristalsis , a series of muscular contraction in the digestive tract , move the slough mucus and other material through the intestine , rectum , and anus , excrete the material in fece .
seven  four  zero chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  seven  .  six goblet cell produce and secrete mucus .
the arrow in this micrograph point to the mucus - secrete goblet cell ( magnification one  six  zero  zero ⨯ ) in the intestinal epithelium .
( credit micrograph 
micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
endothelia
the epithelial cell line the urogenital tract , blood vessel , lymphatic vessel , and certain other tissue be know as endothelia .
these tightly packed cell provide a particularly effective frontline barrier against invader .
the endothelia of the blood - brain barrier , for example , protect the central nervous system ( cns ) , which consist of the brain and the spinal cord .
the cns be one of the most sensitive and important area of the body , as microbial infection of the cns can quickly lead to serious and often fatal inflammation .
the cell junction in the blood vessel travel through the cns be some of the tight and tough in the body , prevent any transient microbe in the bloodstream from enter the cns .
this keep the cerebrospinal fluid that surround and bathe the brain and spinal cord sterile under normal condition .

describe how the mucociliary escalator function .

name two place
- pron - would find endothelia .
mechanical defenses
in addition to physical barrier that keep microbe out , the body have a number of mechanical defense that physically remove pathogen from the body , prevent - pron - from take up residence .
- pron - have already discuss several example of mechanical defense , include the shedding of skin cell , the expulsion of mucus via the mucociliary escalator , and the excretion of fece through intestinal peristalsis .
other important example of mechanical defense include the flush action of urine and tear , which both serve to carry microbe away from the body .
the flush action of urine be largely responsible for the normally sterile environment of the urinary tract , which include the chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defense seven  four  one kidney , ureter , and urinary bladder .
urine pass out of the body wash out transient microorganism , prevent - pron - from take up residence .
the eye also have physical barrier and mechanical mechanism for prevent infection .
the eyelash and eyelid prevent dust and airborne microorganism from reach the surface of the eye .
any microbe or debris that make - pron - past these physical barrier may be flush out by the mechanical action of blink , which bathe the eye in tear , wash debris away ( figure one  seven  .  seven ) .
figure one  seven  .  seven tear flush microbe away from the surface of the eye .
urine wash microbe out of the urinary tract as - pron - pass through  as a result , the urinary system be normally sterile .

name two mechanical defense that protect the eye .
microbiome
in various region of the body , resident microbiota serve as an important first - line defense against invade pathogen .
through - pron - occupation of cellular bind site and competition for available nutrient , the resident microbiota prevent the critical early step of pathogen attachment and proliferation require for the establishment of an infection .
for example , in the vagina , member of the resident microbiota compete with opportunistic pathogen like the yeast candida .
this competition prevent infection by limit the availability of nutrient , thus inhibit the growth of candida , keep - pron - population in check .
similar competition occur between the microbiota and potential pathogen on the skin , in the upper respiratory tract , and in the gastrointestinal tract .
as will be discuss later in this chapter , the resident microbiota also contribute to the chemical defense of the innate nonspecific host defense .
seven  four  two chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the importance of the normal microbiota in host defense be highlight by the increase susceptibility to infectious disease when the microbiota be disrupt or eliminate .
treatment with antibiotic can significantly deplete the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract , provide an advantage for pathogenic bacteria to colonize and cause diarrheal infection .
in the case of diarrhea cause by clostridium difficile , the infection can be severe and potentially lethal .
one strategy for treat c . difficile infection be fecal transplantation , which involve the transfer of fecal material from a donor ( screen for potential pathogen ) into the intestine of the recipient patient as a method of restore the normal microbiota and combat c . difficile infection .
table one  seven  .  two provide a summary of the physical defense discuss in this section .
physical defenses of nonspecific innate immunity defense examples function cellular barrier skin , mucous membrane , endothelial cell
deny entry to pathogen mechanical defense shedding of skin cell , mucociliary sweeping , peristalsis ,
flush action of urine and tear remove pathogen from potential site of infection microbiome resident bacteria of the skin , upper respiratory tract , gastrointestinal tract , and genitourinary tract compete with pathogen for cellular bind site and nutrient
table one  seven  .  two
 list
two way resident microbiota defend against pathogen .
one  seven  .  two chemical defenses learning objectives

describe how enzyme in body fluid provide protection against infection or disease  list and describe the function of antimicrobial peptide , complement component , cytokine , and acute - phase protein  describe similarity and difference among classic , alternate , and lectin complement pathway
in addition to physical defense , the innate nonspecific immune system use a number of chemical mediator that inhibit microbial invader .
the term “ chemical mediator " encompass a wide array of substance find in various body fluid and tissue throughout the body .
chemical mediator may work alone or in conjunction with each other to inhibit microbial colonization and infection .
some chemical mediator be endogenously produce , mean - pron - be produce by human body cell  other be produce exogenously , mean that - pron - be produce by certain microbe that be part of the microbiome .
some mediator be produce continually , bathe the area in the antimicrobial substance  other be produce or activate primarily in response to some stimulus , such as the presence of microbe .
chemical and enzymatic mediators found in body fluids fluids produce by the skin include example of both endogenous and exogenous mediator .
sebaceous gland in the dermis secrete an oil call sebum that be release onto the skin surface through hair follicle .
this sebum be chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  four  three an endogenous mediator , provide an additional layer of defense by help seal off the pore of the hair follicle , prevent bacteria on the skin 's surface from invade sweat gland and surround tissue ( figure one  seven  .  eight ) .
certain member of the microbiome , such as the bacterium propionibacterium acne and the fungus malassezia , among other , can use lipase enzyme to degrade sebum , use - pron - as a food source .
this produce oleic acid , which create a mildly acidic environment on the surface of the skin that be inhospitable to many pathogenic microbe .
oleic acid be an example of an exogenously produce mediator because - pron - be produce by resident microbe and not directly by body cell .
figure one  seven  .  eight sebaceous gland secrete sebum , a chemical mediator that lubricate and protect the skin from invade microbe .
sebum be also a food source for resident microbe that produce oleic acid , an exogenously produce mediator .
( credit micrograph 
micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
environmental factor that affect the microbiota of the skin can have a direct impact on the production of chemical mediator .
low humidity or decrease sebum production , for example , could make the skin less habitable for microbe that produce oleic acid , thus make the skin more susceptible to pathogen normally inhibit by the skin 's low ph .
many skin moisturizer be formulate to counter such effect by restore moisture and essential oil to the skin .
the digestive tract also produce a large number of chemical mediator that inhibit or kill microbe .
in the oral cavity , saliva contain mediator such as lactoperoxidase enzyme , and mucus secrete by the esophagus contain the antibacterial enzyme lysozyme .
in the stomach , highly acidic gastric fluid kill most microbe .
in the low digestive tract , the intestine have pancreatic and intestinal enzyme , antibacterial peptide ( cryptin ) , bile produce from the liver , and specialize paneth cell that produce lysozyme .
together , these mediator be able to eliminate most pathogen that manage to survive the acidic environment of the stomach .
in the urinary tract , urine flush microbe out of the body during urination .
furthermore , the slight acidity of urine ( the average ph be about six ) inhibit the growth of many microbe and potential pathogen in the urinary tract .
the female reproductive system employ lactate , an exogenously produce chemical mediator , to inhibit microbial growth .
the cell and tissue layer compose the vagina produce glycogen , a branched and more complex polymer of glucose .
lactobacilli in the area ferment glycogen to produce lactate , lower the ph in the vagina and inhibit transient microbiota , opportunistic pathogen like candida ( a yeast associate with vaginal infection ) , and other pathogen responsible for sexually transmit disease .
in the eye , tear contain the chemical mediator lysozyme and lactoferrin , both of which be capable of eliminate microbe that have find - pron - way to the surface of the eye .
lysozyme cleave the bond between nag and nam seven  four  four chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five in peptidoglycan , a component of the cell wall in bacteria .
- pron - be more effective against gram - positive bacteria , which lack the protective outer membrane associate with gram - negative bacteria .
lactoferrin inhibit microbial growth by chemically bind and sequester iron .
this effectually starve many microbe that require iron for growth .
in the ear , ceruman ( earwax ) exhibit antimicrobial property due to the presence of fatty acid , which lower the ph to between three and five .
the respiratory tract use various chemical mediator in the nasal passage , trachea , and lung .
the mucus produce in the nasal passage contain a mix of antimicrobial molecule similar to those find in tear and saliva ( e . g . , lysozyme , lactoferrin , lactoperoxidase ) .
secretion in the trachea and lung also contain lysozyme and lactoferrin , as well as a diverse group of additional chemical mediator , such as the lipoprotein complex call surfactant , which have antibacterial property .

explain the difference between endogenous and exogenous mediator
 describe how ph affect antimicrobial defense antimicrobial peptides
the antimicrobial peptide ( amp ) be a special class of nonspecific cell - derive mediator with broad - spectrum antimicrobial property .
some amp be produce routinely by the body , whereas other be primarily produce ( or produce in great quantity ) in response to the presence of an invade pathogen .
research have begin explore how amp can be use in the diagnosis and treatment of disease .
amp may induce cell damage in microorganism in a variety of way , include by inflict damage to membrane , destroy dna and rna , or interfere with cell - wall synthesis .
depend on the specific antimicrobial mechanism , a particular amp may inhibit only certain group of microbe ( e . g . , gram - positive or gram - negative bacteria ) or - pron - may be more broadly effective against bacteria , fungus , protozoa , and virus .
many amp be find on the skin , but - pron - can also be find in other region of the body .
a family of amp call defensin can be produce by epithelial cell throughout the body as well as by cellular defense such as macrophage and neutrophil ( see cellular defenses ) .
defensin may be secrete or act inside host cell  - pron - combat microorganism by damage - pron - plasma membrane .
amp call bacteriocin be produce exogenously by certain member of the resident microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract .
the gene code for these type of amp be often carry on plasmid and can be pass between different specie within the resident microbiota through lateral or horizontal gene transfer .
there be numerous other amp throughout the body .
the characteristic of a few of the more significant amp be summarize in table one  seven  .  three .
characteristic of selected antimicrobial peptides ( amp )
amp secrete by body site pathogens inhibit mode of action
bacteriocins resident microbiota gastrointestinal tract bacteria disrupt membrane cathelicidin epithelial cell , macrophage , and other cell type skin bacteria and fungi disrupt membrane table one  seven  .  three chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  four  five characteristics of selected antimicrobial peptides ( amp )
amp secrete by body site pathogens inhibit mode of action defensin epithelial cell , macrophage , neutrophil throughout the body fungi , bacteria , and many virus
disrupt membrane dermicidin sweat gland skin bacteria and fungi disrupts membrane integrity and ion channel histatins salivary gland oral cavity fungi disrupt intracellular function table one  seven  .  three

why be antimicrobial peptide ( amp )
consider nonspecific defense ?
plasma protein mediators
many nonspecific innate immune factor be find in plasma , the fluid portion of blood .
plasma contain electrolyte , sugar , lipid , and protein , each of which help to maintain homeostasis ( i . e . , stable internal body function ) , and contain the protein involve in the clotting of blood .
additional protein find in blood plasma , such as acute - phase protein , complement protein , and cytokine , be involve in the nonspecific innate immune response .
plasma versus serum
there be two term for the fluid portion of blood  plasma and serum .
how do - pron - differ if - pron - be both fluid and lack cell ?
the fluid portion of blood leave over after coagulation ( blood cell clotting ) have take place be serum .
although molecule such as many vitamin , electrolyte , certain sugar , complement protein , and antibody be still present in serum , clotting factor be largely deplete .
plasma , conversely , still contain all the clotting element .
to obtain plasma from blood , an anticoagulant must be use to prevent clotting .
example of anticoagulant include heparin and ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid ( edta ) .
because clotting be inhibit , once obtain , the sample must be gently spin down in a centrifuge .
the heavy , denser blood cell form a pellet at the bottom of a centrifuge tube , while the fluid plasma portion , which be light and less dense , remain above the cell pellet .
acute - phase proteins
the acute - phase protein be another class of antimicrobial mediator .
acute - phase protein be primarily produce in the liver and secrete into the blood in response to inflammatory molecule from the immune system .
example of acute - phase protein include c - reactive protein , serum amyloid a , ferritin , transferrin , fibrinogen , and mannosebinding lectin .
each of these protein have a different chemical structure and inhibit or destroy microbe in some way ( table one  seven  .  four ) .
micro connections seven  four  six chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five some acute - phase proteins and - pron - function c - reactive protein serum amyloid a coats bacteria ( opsonization ) , prepare - pron - for ingestion by phagocyte ferritin transferrin bind and sequester iron , thereby inhibit the growth of pathogen fibrinogen involve in formation of blood clot that trap bacterial pathogen
mannose - bind lectin activates complement cascade table one  seven  .  four
the complement system
the complement system be a group of plasma protein mediator that can act as an innate nonspecific defense while also serve to connect innate and adaptive immunity ( discuss in the next chapter ) .
the complement system be compose of more than three  zero protein ( include c one through c nine ) that normally circulate as precursor protein in blood .
these precursor protein become activate when stimulate or trigger by a variety of factor , include the presence of microorganism .
complement protein be consider part of innate nonspecific immunity because - pron - be always present in the blood and tissue fluid , allow - pron - to be activate quickly .
also , when activate through the alternative pathway ( describe later in this section ) , complement protein target pathogen in a nonspecific manner .
the process by which circulate complement precursor become functional be call complement activation .
this process be a cascade that can be trigger by one of three different mechanism , know as the alternative , classical , and lectin pathway .
the alternative pathway be initiate by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein c three .
the hydrolysis of c three produce two product , c three a and c three b .
when no invader microbe be present , c three b be very quickly degrade in a hydrolysis reaction use the water in the blood .
however , if invade microbe be present , c three b attach to the surface of these microbe .
once attach , c three b will recruit other complement protein in a cascade ( figure one  seven  .  nine ) .
the classical pathway provide a more efficient mechanism of activate the complement cascade , but - pron - depend upon the production of antibody by the specific adaptive immune defense .
to initiate the classical pathway , a specific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody - antigen complex .
this activate the first protein in the complement cascade , the c one complex .
the c one complex be a multipart protein complex , and each component participate in the full activation of the overall complex .
follow recruitment and activation of the c one complex , the remain classical pathway complement protein be recruit and activate in a cascading sequence ( figure one  seven  .  nine ) .
the lectin activation pathway be similar to the classical pathway , but - pron - be trigger by the binding of mannose - binding lectin , an acute - phase protein , to carbohydrate on the microbial surface .
like other acute - phase protein , lectin be produce by liver cell and be commonly upregulate in response to inflammatory signal receive by the body during an infection ( figure one  seven  .  nine ) .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  four  seven figure one  seven  .  nine
the three complement activation pathway have different trigger , as show here , but all three result in the activation of the complement protein c three , which produce c three a and c three b .
the latter bind to the surface of the target cell and then work with other complement protein to cleave c five into c five a and c five b .
c five b also bind to the cell surface and then recruit c six through c nine  these molecule form a ring structure call the membrane attack complex ( mac ) , which punch through the cell membrane of the invade pathogen , cause - pron - to swell and burst .
although each complement activation pathway be initiate in a different way , - pron - all provide the same protective outcome  opsonization , inflammation , chemotaxis , and cytolysis .
the term opsonization refer to the coating of a pathogen by a chemical substance ( call an opsonin ) that allow phagocytic cell to recognize , engulf , and destroy - pron - more easily .
opsonin from the complement cascade include c one q , c three b , and c four b .
additional important opsonin include mannose - bind protein and antibody .
the complement fragment c three a and
c five a be well - characterize anaphylatoxin with potent proinflammatory function .
anaphylatoxin activate mast cell , cause degranulation and the release of inflammatory chemical signal , include mediator that cause vasodilation and increase vascular permeability .
c five a be also one of the most potent chemoattractant for neutrophil and other white blood cell , cellular defense that will be discuss in the next section .
the complement protein c six , c seven , c eight , and c nine assemble into a membrane attack complex ( mac ) , which allow c nine to polymerize into pore in the membrane of gram - negative bacteria .
these pore allow water , ion , and other molecule to move freely in and out of the targeted cell , eventually lead to cell lysis and death of the pathogen ( figure one  seven  .  nine ) .
however , the mac be only effective against gram - negative bacteria  - pron - can not penetrate the thick layer of peptidoglycan associate with cell wall of gram - positive bacteria .
since the mac do not pose a lethal threat to gram - positive bacterial pathogen , complement - mediate opsonization be more important for - pron - clearance .
cytokines cytokines be soluble protein that act as communication signal between cell .
in a nonspecific innate immune response , various cytokine may be release to stimulate production of chemical mediator or other cell function , such as cell proliferation , cell differentiation , inhibition of cell division , apoptosis , and chemotaxis .
when a cytokine bind to - pron - target receptor , the effect can vary widely depend on the type of cytokine and the type of cell or receptor to which - pron - have bind .
the function of a particular cytokine can be describe as autocrine , paracrine , or endocrine ( figure one  seven  .  one  zero ) .
in autocrine function , the same cell that release the cytokine be the recipient of the signal  in other word , autocrine function be a form of self - stimulation by a cell .
in contrast , paracrine function involve the release of cytokine from one cell to other nearby cell , stimulate some response from the recipient cell .
last , endocrine function occur when cell release cytokine into the bloodstream to be carry to target cell much farther away .
seven  four  eight chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  seven  .  one  zero autocrine , paracrine , and
endocrine action describe which cell be target by cytokine and how far the cytokine must travel to bind to - pron - intend target cell ' receptor .
three important class of cytokine be the interleukin , chemokine , and interferon .
the interleukin be originally think to be produce only by leukocyte ( white blood cell ) and to only stimulate leukocyte , thus the reason for - pron - name .
although interleukin be involve in modulate almost every function of the immune system , - pron - role in the body be not restrict to immunity .
interleukin be also produce by and stimulate a variety of cell unrelated to immune defense .
the chemokine be chemotactic factor that recruit leukocyte to site of infection , tissue damage , and inflammation .
in contrast to more general chemotactic factor , like complement factor c five a , chemokine be very specific in the subset of leukocyte - pron - recruit .
interferon be a diverse group of immune signal molecule and be especially important in - pron - defense against virus .
type i interferon ( interferon - α and interferon - β ) be produce and release by cell infect with virus .
these interferon stimulate nearby cell to stop production of mrna , destroy rna already produce , and reduce protein synthesis .
these cellular change inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus , slow the spread of the virus .
type i interferon also stimulate various immune cell involve in viral clearance to more aggressively attack virus - infect cell .
type ii interferon ( interferon - γ ) be an important activator of immune cell ( figure one  seven  .  one  one ) .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  four  nine figure one  seven  .  one  one interferons be cytokine release by a cell infect with a virus .
interferon - α and interferon - β signal uninfected neighboring cell to inhibit mrna synthesis , destroy rna , and reduce protein synthesis ( top arrow ) .
interferon - α and interferon - β also promote apoptosis in cell infect with the virus ( middle arrow ) .
interferon - γ alert neighbor immune cell to an attack ( bottom arrow ) .
although interferon do not cure the cell release - pron - or other infected cell , which will soon die , - pron - release may prevent additional cell from become infect , thus stem the infection .
inflammation - elicit mediator
many of the chemical mediator discuss in this section contribute in some way to inflammation and fever , which be nonspecific immune response discuss in more detail in inflammation and fever .
cytokine stimulate the production of acute - phase protein such as c - reactive protein and mannose - binding lectin in the liver .
these acutephase protein act as opsonin , activate complement cascade through the lectin pathway .
some cytokine also bind mast cell and basophil , induce - pron - to release histamine , a proinflammatory compound .
histamine receptor be find on a variety of cell and mediate proinflammatory event , such as bronchoconstriction ( tightening of the airway ) and smooth muscle contraction .
in addition to histamine , mast cell may release other chemical mediator , such as leukotriene .
leukotriene be lipid - base proinflammatory mediator that be produce from the metabolism of arachidonic acid in the cell membrane of leukocyte and tissue cell .
compare with the proinflammatory effect of histamine , those of leukotriene be more potent and longer last .
together , these chemical mediator can induce cough , vomiting , and diarrhea , which serve to expel pathogen from the body .
certain cytokine also stimulate the production of prostaglandin , chemical mediator that promote the inflammatory effect of kinin and histamine .
prostaglandin can also help to set the body temperature higher , lead to fever , which promote the activity of white blood cell and slightly inhibit the growth of pathogenic microbe ( see inflammation and fever ) .
another inflammatory mediator , bradykinin , contribute to edema , which occur when fluid and leukocyte leak out of the bloodstream and into tissue .
- pron - bind to receptor on cell in the capillary wall , cause the capillary to dilate and become more permeable to fluid .
seven  five  zero chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what do the three complement activation pathway have in common ?

explain autocrine , paracrine , and endocrine signal .

name two important inflammation - elicit mediator .
part two to relieve the constriction of - pron - airway , angela be immediately treat with antihistamine and administer corticosteroid through an inhaler , and then monitor for a period of time .
though - pron - condition do not worsen , the drug do not seem to be alleviate - pron - condition .
- pron - be admit to the hospital for further observation , testing , and treatment .
follow admission , a clinician conduct allergy testing to try to determine if something in - pron - environment may be trigger an allergic inflammatory response .
a doctor order blood analysis to check for level of particular cytokine .
a sputum sample be also take and send to the lab for microbial staining , culturing , and identification of pathogen that could be cause an infection .

which aspect of the innate immune system could be contribute to angela 's airway constriction ?

why be angela treat with antihistamine ?

why would the doctor be interested in level of cytokine in angela 's blood ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
table one  seven  .  five provide a summary of the chemical defense discuss in this section .
chemical defenses of nonspecific innate immunity defense examples function sebum from sebaceous gland provide oil barrier protect hair follicle pore from pathogen oleic acid from sebum and skin microbiota lowers ph to inhibit pathogen lysozyme in secretion kills bacteria by attack cell wall acid in stomach , urine , and vagina inhibits or kill bacteria digestive enzyme and bile kill bacteria lactoferrin and transferrin bind and sequester iron , inhibit bacterial growth chemicals and enzyme in body fluid surfactant in lung
kills bacteria antimicrobial peptide defensins , bacteriocin , dermicidin , cathelicidin , histatin , kill bacteria by attack membrane or interfere with cell function table one  seven  .  five clinical focus chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host
defenses seven  five  one chemical defenses of nonspecific innate immunity defense examples function acute - phase protein ( c - reactive protein , serum amyloid a ,
ferritin , fibrinogen , transferrin , and mannose - binding lectin )
inhibit the growth of bacteria and assist in the trapping and killing of bacteria complements c three b and c four b opsonization of pathogen to aid phagocytosis complement c five a chemoattractant for phagocyte plasma protein mediator complements c three a and
c five a proinflammatory anaphylatoxin interleukins stimulate and modulate most function of immune system chemokines recruit white blood cell to infect area cytokines interferons alert cell to viral infection , induce apoptosis of virusinfected cell , induce antiviral defense in infected and nearby uninfected cell , stimulate immune cell to attack virus - infect cell histamine promotes vasodilation , bronchoconstriction , smooth muscle contraction , increase secretion and mucus production leukotrienes promote inflammation  strong and longer last than histamine prostaglandins promote inflammation and fever inflammationeliciting mediator bradykinin increases vasodilation and vascular permeability , lead to edema table one  seven  .  five one  seven  .  three cellular defenses learning objectives
 identify and describe the component of blood

explain the process by which the form element of blood be form ( hematopoiesis )

describe the characteristic of form element find in peripheral blood , as well as - pron - respective function within the innate immune system
in the previous section , - pron - discuss some of the chemical mediator find in plasma , the fluid portion of blood .
the nonfluid portion of blood consist of various type of form element , so call because - pron - be all form from the same stem cell find in bone marrow .
the three major category of form element be  red blood cell ( rbcs ) , also call erythrocyte  platelet , also call thrombocyte  and white blood cell ( wbcs ) , also call leukocyte .
red blood cell be primarily responsible for carry oxygen to tissue .
platelet be cellular fragment that participate in blood clot formation and tissue repair .
several different type of wbc participate in various nonspecific mechanism of innate and adaptive immunity .
in this section , - pron - will focus primarily on the innate mechanism of various type of wbc .
seven  five  two chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five hematopoiesis all of the formed element of blood be derive from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell ( hsc ) in the bone marrow .
as the hsc make copy of - pron - in the bone marrow , individual cell receive different cue from the body that control how - pron - develop and mature .
as a result , the hsc differentiate into different type of blood cell that , once mature , circulate in peripheral blood .
this process of differentiation , call hematopoiesis , be show in more detail in figure one  seven  .  one  two .
in term of sheer number , the vast majority of hsc become erythrocyte .
much small number become leukocyte and platelet .
leukocyte can be further subdivide into granulocyte , which be characterize by numerous granule visible in the cytoplasm , and agranulocyte , which lack granule .
figure one  seven  .  one  three provide an overview of the various type of form element , include - pron - relative number , primary function , and lifespan .
figure one  seven  .  one  two
all the form element of the blood arise by differentiation of hematopoietic stem cell in the bone marrow .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  five  three figure one  seven  .  one  three
formed element of blood include erythrocyte ( red blood cell ) , leukocyte ( white blood cell ) , and platelet .
seven  five  four chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five granulocytes
the various type of granulocyte can be distinguish from one another in a blood smear by the appearance of - pron - nucleus and the content of - pron - granule , which confer different trait , function , and staining property .
the neutrophil , also call polymorphonuclear neutrophil ( pmns ) , have a nucleus with three to five lobe and small , numerous , lilac - color granule .
each lobe of the nucleus be connect by a thin strand of material to the other lobe .
the eosinophil have few lobe in the nucleus ( typically two – three ) and large granule that stain reddish - orange .
the basophil have a two - lob nucleus and large granule that stain dark blue or purple ( figure one  seven  .  one  four ) .
figure
one  seven  .  one  four granulocytes can be distinguish by the number of lobe in - pron - nucleus and the stain property of - pron - granule .
( credit " neutrophil " micrograph 
modification of work by ed uthman )
neutrophils ( pmn )
neutrophils ( pmn ) be frequently involve in the elimination and destruction of extracellular bacteria .
- pron - be capable of migrate through the wall of blood vessel to area of bacterial infection and tissue damage , where - pron - seek out and kill infectious bacteria .
pmn granule contain a variety of defensin and hydrolytic enzyme that help - pron - destroy bacteria through phagocytosis ( describe in more detail in pathogen recognition and phagocytosis )
in addition , when many neutrophil be bring into an infected area , - pron - can be stimulate to release toxic molecule into the surround tissue to better clear infectious agent .
this be call degranulation .
another mechanism use by neutrophil be neutrophil extracellular trap ( nets ) , which be extrude mesh of chromatin that be closely associate with antimicrobial granule protein and component .
chromatin be dna with associate protein ( usually histone protein , around which dna wrap for organization and pack within a cell ) .
by create and release a mesh or lattice - like structure of chromatin that be couple with antimicrobial protein , the neutrophil can mount a highly concentrated and efficient attack against nearby pathogen .
protein frequently associate with net include lactoferrin , gelatinase , cathepsin g , and myeloperoxidase .
each have a different mean of promote antimicrobial activity , help neutrophil eliminate pathogen .
the toxic protein in net may kill some of the body 's own cell along with invade pathogen .
however , this collateral damage can be repair after the danger of the infection have be eliminate .
as neutrophil fight an infection , a visible accumulation of leukocyte , cellular debris , and bacteria at the site of infection can be observe .
this buildup be what - pron - call pus ( also know as purulent or suppurative discharge or drainage ) .
the presence of pus be a sign that the immune defense have be activate against an infection  chapter one  seven  innate nonspecific host defense seven  five  five historically , some physician believe that induce pus formation could actually promote the healing of wound .
the practice of promote " laudable pu " ( by , for instance , wrap a wound in greasy wool soak in wine ) date back to the ancient physician galen in the two nd century ad , and be practice in variant form until the one  seven th century ( though - pron - be not universally accept ) .
today , this method be no longer practice because - pron - now know that - pron - be not effective .
although a small amount of pus formation can indicate a strong immune response , artificially induce pus formation do not promote recovery .
eosinophils eosinophils be granulocyte that protect against protozoa and helminth  - pron - also play a role in allergic reaction .
the granule of eosinophil , which readily absorb the acidic reddish dye eosin , contain histamine , degradative enzyme , and a compound know as major basic protein ( mbp )
( figure one  seven  .  one  four ) .
mbp bind to the surface carbohydrate of parasite , and this binding be associate with disruption of the cell membrane and membrane permeability .
basophils basophils have cytoplasmic granule of varied size and be name for - pron - granule ' ability to absorb the basic dye methylene blue ( figure one  seven  .  one  four ) .
- pron - stimulation and degranulation can result from multiple triggering event .
activate complement fragment c three a and c five a , produce in the activation cascade of complement protein , act as anaphylatoxin by induce degranulation of basophil and inflammatory response .
this cell type be important in allergic reaction and other response that involve inflammation .
one of the most abundant component of basophil granule be histamine , which be release along with other chemical factor when the basophil be stimulate .
these chemical can be chemotactic and can help to open the gap between cell in the blood vessel .
other mechanism for basophil triggering require the assistance of antibody , as discuss in b lymphocytes and humoral immunity .
mast cells hematopoiesis also give rise to mast cell , which appear to be derive from the same common myeloid progenitor cell as neutrophil , eosinophil , and basophil .
functionally , mast cell be very similar to basophil , contain many of the same component in - pron - granule ( e . g . , histamine ) and play a similar role in allergic response and other inflammatory reaction .
however , unlike basophil , mast cell leave the circulate blood and be most frequently find reside in tissue .
- pron - be often associate with blood vessel and nerve or find close to surface that interface with the external environment , such as the skin and mucous membrane in various region of the body ( figure one  seven  .  one  five ) .
seven  five  six chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  seven  .  one  five mast cell function similarly to basophil by induce and promote inflammatory response .
( a )
this figure show mast cell in blood .
in a blood smear , - pron - be difficult to differentiate from basophil ( b ) .
unlike basophil , mast cell migrate from the blood into various tissue .
( credit right 
modification of work by greenland jr , xu x , sayah dm , liu fc , jones kd , looney mr , caughey gh )

describe the granule and nucleus of neutrophil , eosinophil , basophil , and mast cell .

name three antimicrobial mechanism of neutrophil
part three angela 's test come back negative for all common allergen , and - pron - sputum sample contain no abnormal presence of pathogenic microbe or elevated level of member of the normal respiratory microbiota .
- pron - do , however , have elevate level of inflammatory cytokine in - pron - blood .
the swelling of - pron - airway have still not respond to treatment with antihistamine or corticosteroid .
additional blood work show that angela have a mildly elevate white blood cell count but normal antibody level .
also , - pron - have a low - than - normal level of the complement protein c four .

what do this new information reveal about the cause of angela 's constricted airway ?

what be some possible condition that could lead to low level of complement protein ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
agranulocyte as - pron - name suggest , agranulocyte lack visible granule in the cytoplasm .
agranulocyte can be categorize as lymphocyte or monocyte ( figure one  seven  .  one  three ) .
among the lymphocyte be natural killer cell , which play an important role in nonspecific innate immune defense .
lymphocyte also include the b cell and t cell , which be discuss in the next chapter because - pron - be central player in the specific adaptive immune defense .
the monocyte differentiate into macrophage and dendritic cell , which be collectively refer to as the mononuclear phagocyte system .
clinical focus chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defense seven  five  seven natural killer cells
most lymphocyte be primarily involve in the specific adaptive immune response , and thus will be discuss in the follow chapter .
an exception be the natural killer cell ( nk cell )  these mononuclear lymphocyte use nonspecific mechanism to recognize and destroy cell that be abnormal in some way .
cancer cell and cell infect with virus be two example of cellular abnormality that be target by nk cell .
recognition of such cell involve a complex process of identify inhibitory and activate molecular marker on the surface of the target cell .
molecular marker that make up the major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) be express by healthy cell as an indication of " self .
"
this will be cover in more detail in next chapter .
nk cell be able to recognize normal mhc marker on the surface of healthy cell , and these mhc marker serve as an inhibitory signal prevent nk cell activation .
however , cancer cell and virus - infect cell actively diminish or eliminate expression of mhc marker on - pron - surface .
when these mhc marker be diminished or absent , the nk cell interpret this as an abnormality and a cell in distress .
this be one part of the nk cell activation process ( figure one  seven  .  one  six ) .
nk cell be also activate by bind to activate molecular molecule on the target cell .
these activate molecular molecule include “ altered self " or
" nonself " molecule .
when a nk cell recognize a decrease in inhibitory normal mhc molecule and an increase in activate molecule on the surface of a cell , the nk cell will be activate to eliminate the cell in distress .
figure one  seven  .  one  six natural killer ( nk ) cell be inhibit by the presence of the major histocompatibility cell ( mhc ) receptor on healthy cell .
cancer cell and virus - infect cell have reduce expression of mhc and increase expression of activate molecule .
when a nk cell recognize decrease mhc and increase activate molecule , - pron - will kill the abnormal cell .
once a cell have be recognize as a target , the nk cell can use several different mechanism to kill - pron - target .
for example , - pron - may express cytotoxic membrane protein and cytokine that stimulate the target cell to undergo apoptosis , or control cell suicide .
nk cell may also use perforin - mediate cytotoxicity to induce apoptosis in seven  five  eight chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five target cell .
this mechanism rely on two toxin release from granule in the cytoplasm of the nk cell  perforin , a protein that create pore in the target cell , and granzyme , protease that enter through the pore into the target cell 's cytoplasm , where - pron - trigger a cascade of protein activation that lead to apoptosis .
the nk cell bind to the abnormal target cell , release - pron - destructive payload , and detache from the target cell .
while the target cell undergoe apoptosis , the nk cell synthesize more perforin and protease to use on - pron - next target .
nk cell contain these toxic compound in granule in - pron - cytoplasm .
when stain , the granule be azurophilic and can be visualize under a light microscope ( figure one  seven  .  one  seven ) .
even though - pron - have granule , nk cell be not consider granulocyte because - pron - granule be far less numerous than those find in true granulocyte .
furthermore , nk cell have a different lineage than granulocyte , arise from lymphoid rather than myeloid stem cell ( figure one  seven  .  one  two ) .
figure one  seven  .  one  seven natural killer cell with perforin - contain granule .
( credit  modification of work by rolstad b )
monocyte
the large of the white blood cell , monocyte have a nucleus that lack lob , and - pron - also lack granule in the cytoplasm ( figure one  seven  .  one  eight ) .
nevertheless , - pron - be effective phagocyte , engulf pathogen and apoptotic cell to help fight infection .
when monocyte leave the bloodstream and enter a specific body tissue , - pron - differentiate into tissue - specific phagocyte call macrophage and dendritic cell .
- pron - be particularly important resident of lymphoid tissue , as well as nonlymphoid site and organ .
macrophage and dendritic cell can reside in body tissue for significant length of time .
macrophage in specific body tissue develop characteristic suit to the particular tissue .
not only do - pron - provide immune protection for the tissue in which - pron - reside but - pron - also support normal function of - pron - neighboring tissue cell through the production of cytokine .
macrophage be give tissue - specific name , and a few example of tissue - specific macrophage be list in table one  seven  .  six .
dendritic cell be important sentinel reside in the skin and mucous membrane , which be portal of entry for many pathogen .
monocyte , macrophage , and dendritic cell be all highly phagocytic and important promoter of the immune response through - pron - production and release of cytokine .
these cell provide an essential bridge between innate and adaptive immune response , as discuss in the next section as well as the next chapter .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  five  nine figure one  seven  .  one  eight
monocytes be large , agranular white blood cell with a nucleus that lack lob .
when monocyte leave the bloodstream , - pron - differentiate and become macrophage with tissue - specific property .
( credit leave  modification of work by armed forces institute of pathology  credit right 
modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
macrophage find in various body tissues tissue macrophage brain and central nervous system
microglial cell
liver kupffer cell lungs alveolar macrophage ( dust cell )
peritoneal cavity peritoneal macrophage table one  seven  .  six

describe the signal that activate natural killer cell .

what be the difference between monocyte and macrophage ?
one  seven  .  four pathogen recognition and phagocytosis learning objectives

explain how leukocyte migrate from peripheral blood into infect tissue 
explain the mechanism by which leukocyte recognize pathogen 
explain the process of phagocytosis and the mechanism by which phagocyte destroy and degrade pathogen several of the cell type discuss in the previous section can be describe as phagocyte - cell whose main function be to seek , ingest , and kill pathogen .
this process , call phagocytosis , be first observe in starfish in the one  eight  eight  zero s by nobel prize - win zoologist ilya metchnikoff ( one  eight  four  five – one  nine  one  six ) , who make the connection to white blood cell ( wbcs ) seven  six  zero chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five in human and other animal .
at the time , pasteur and other scientist believe that wbc be spread pathogen rather than kill - pron - ( which be true for some disease , such as tuberculosis ) .
but in most case , phagocyte provide a strong , swift , and effective defense against a broad range of microbe , make - pron - a critical component of innate nonspecific immunity .
this section will focus on the mechanism by which phagocyte be able to seek , recognize , and destroy pathogen .
extravasation ( diapedesis ) of leukocyte
some phagocyte be leukocyte ( wbcs ) that normally circulate in the bloodstream .
to reach pathogen locate in infect tissue , leukocyte must pass through the wall of small capillary blood vessel within tissue .
this process , call extravasation , or diapedesis , be initiate by complement factor c five a , as well as cytokine release into the immediate vicinity by resident macrophage and tissue cell respond to the presence of the infectious agent ( figure one  seven  .  one  nine ) .
similar to c five a , many of these cytokine be proinflammatory and chemotactic , and - pron - bind to cell of small capillary blood vessel , initiate a response in the endothelial cell line the inside of the blood vessel wall .
this response involve the upregulation and expression of various cellular adhesion molecule and receptor .
leukocyte pass through will stick slightly to the adhesion molecule , slow down and roll along the blood vessel wall near the infected area .
when - pron - reach a cellular junction , - pron - will bind to even more of these adhesion molecule , flatten out and squeeze through the cellular junction in a process know as transendothelial migration .
this mechanism of “ rolling adhesion " allow leukocyte to exit the bloodstream and enter the infect area , where - pron - can begin phagocytose the invade pathogen .
note that extravasation do not occur in artery or vein .
these blood vessel be surround by thick , multilayer protective wall , in contrast to the thin single - cell - layer wall of capillary .
furthermore , the blood flow in artery be too turbulent to allow for roll adhesion .
also , some leukocyte tend to respond to an infection more quickly than other .
the first to arrive typically be neutrophil , often within hour of a bacterial infection .
by contract , monocyte may take several day to leave the bloodstream and differentiate into macrophage .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  six  one figure one  seven  .  one  nine damaged cell and macrophage that have ingest pathogen release cytokine that be proinflammatory and chemotactic for leukocyte .
in addition , activation of complement at the site of infection result in production of the chemotactic and proinflammatory c five a .
leukocyte exit the blood vessel and follow the chemoattractant signal of cytokine and c five a to the site of infection .
granulocyte such as neutrophil release chemical that destroy pathogen .
- pron - be also capable of phagocytosis and intracellular killing of bacterial pathogen .
seven  six  two chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five watch the follow video on leukocyte extravasation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two leukextrvid ) and leukocyte rolling ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two leukrollvid ) to learn more .

explain the role of adhesion molecule in the process of extravasation .
pathogen recognition
as describe in the previous section , opsonization of pathogen by antibody  complement factor c one q , c three b , and c four b  and lectin can assist phagocytic cell in recognition of pathogen and attachment to initiate phagocytosis .
however , not all pathogen recognition be opsonin dependent .
phagocyte can also recognize molecular structure that be common to many group of pathogenic microbe .
such structure be call pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) .
common pamp include the follow   peptidoglycan , find in bacterial cell wall   flagellin , a protein find in bacterial flagella   lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) from the outer membrane of gram - negative bacteria   lipopeptide , molecule express by most bacteria  and  nucleic acid such as viral dna or rna .
like numerous other pamp , these substance be integral to the structure of broad class of microbe .
the structure that allow phagocytic cell to detect pamp be call pattern recognition receptor ( prr ) .
one group of prr be the toll - like receptor ( tlr ) , which bind to various pamp and communicate with the nucleus of the phagocyte to elicit a response .
many tlr ( and other prr ) be locate on the surface of a phagocyte , but some can also be find embed in the membrane of interior compartment and organelle ( figure one  seven  .  two  zero ) .
these interior prr can be useful for the binding and recognition of intracellular pathogen that may have gain access to the inside of the cell before phagocytosis could take place .
viral nucleic acid , for example , may encounter an interior prr , trigger production of the antiviral cytokine interferon .
in addition to provide the first step of pathogen recognition , the interaction between pamp and prr on macrophage provide an intracellular signal that activate the phagocyte , cause - pron - to transition from a dormant state of readiness and slow proliferation to a state of hyperactivity , proliferation , production / secretion of cytokine , and enhance intracellular killing .
prr on macrophage also respond to chemical distress signal from damaged or stress cell .
this allow macrophage to extend - pron - response beyond protection from infectious disease to a broad role in the inflammatory response initiate from injury or other disease .
link to learning chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  six  three figure one  seven  .  two  zero phagocytic cell contain pattern recognition receptor ( prr ) capable of recognize various pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) .
these prr can be find on the plasma membrane or in internal phagosome .
when a prr recognize a pamp , - pron - send a signal to the nucleus that activate gene involve in phagocytosis , cellular proliferation , production and secretion of antiviral interferon and proinflammatory cytokine , and enhance intracellular killing .

name four pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) .

describe the process of phagocyte activation .
pathogen degradation
once pathogen recognition and attachment occur , the pathogen be engulf in a vesicle and bring into the internal compartment of the phagocyte in a process call phagocytosis ( figure one  seven  .  two  one ) .
prr can aid in phagocytosis by first bind to the pathogen 's surface , but phagocyte be also capable of engulf nearby item even if - pron - be not bind to specific receptor .
to engulf the pathogen , the phagocyte form a pseudopod that wrap around the pathogen and then pinch - pron - off into a membrane vesicle call a phagosome .
acidification of the phagosome ( ph decrease to the range of four – five ) provide an important early antibacterial mechanism .
the phagosome contain the pathogen fuse with one or more lysosome , form a phagolysosome .
formation of the phagolysosome enhance the acidification , which be essential for activation of ph - dependent digestive lysosomal enzyme and production of hydrogen peroxide and toxic reactive oxygen specie .
lysosomal enzyme such as lysozyme , phospholipase , and protease digest the pathogen .
other enzyme be involve a respiratory burst .
during the respiratory burst , phagocyte will increase - pron - uptake and consumption of oxygen , but not for energy production .
the increase oxygen consumption be focus on the production of superoxide anion , hydrogen peroxide , hydroxyl radical , and other reactive oxygen specie that be antibacterial .
in addition to the reactive oxygen specie produce by the respiratory burst , reactive nitrogen compound with seven  six  four chapter one  seven  innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cytotoxic ( cell - kill ) potential can also form .
for example , nitric oxide can react with superoxide to form peroxynitrite , a highly reactive nitrogen compound with degrade capability similar to those of the reactive oxygen specie .
some phagocyte even contain an internal storehouse of microbicidal defensin protein ( e . g . , neutrophil granule ) .
these destructive force can be release into the area around the cell to degrade microbe externally .
neutrophil , especially , can be quite efficient at this secondary antimicrobial mechanism .
once degradation be complete , leftover waste product be excrete from the cell in an exocytic vesicle .
however , - pron - be important to note that not all remain of the pathogen be excrete as waste .
macrophage and dendritic cell be also antigen - present cell involve in the specific adaptive immune response .
these cell further process the remain of the degrade pathogen and present key antigen ( specific pathogen protein ) on - pron - cellular surface .
this be an important step for stimulation of some adaptive immune response , as will be discuss in more detail in the next chapter .
figure one  seven  .  two  one
the stage of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a pathogen , the formation of a phagosome , the digestion of the pathogenic particle in the phagolysosome , and the expulsion of undigested material from the cell .
visit this link ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two phagpathvid ) to view a phagocyte chase and engulf a pathogen .

what be the difference between a phagosome and a lysosome ?
when phagocytosis fail
although phagocytosis successfully destroy many pathogen , some be able to survive and even exploit link to learning micro connections chapter one  seven

innate nonspecific host defenses seven  six  five
this defense mechanism to multiply in the body and cause widespread infection .
protozoan of the genus
leishmania be one example .
these obligate intracellular parasite be flagellate transmit to human by the bite of a sand fly .
infection cause serious and sometimes disfigure sore and ulcer in the skin and other tissue ( figure one  seven  .  two  two ) .
worldwide , an estimate one  .  three million people be newly infect with leishmaniasis annually . [ one ] salivary peptide from the sand fly activate host macrophage at the site of - pron - bite .
the classic or alternate pathway for complement activation ensue with c three b opsonization of the parasite .
leishmania cell be phagocytose , lose - pron - flagella , and multiply in a form know as an amastigote ( leishman - donovan body ) within the phagolysosome .
although many other pathogen be destroy in the phagolysosome , survival of the leishmania amastigote be maintain by the presence of surface lipophosphoglycan and acid phosphatase .
these substance inhibit the macrophage respiratory burst and lysosomal enzyme .
the parasite then multiply inside the cell and lyse the infected macrophage , release the amastigote to infect other macrophage within the same host .
should another sand fly bite an infect person , - pron - may ingest amastigote and then transmit - pron - to another individual through another bite .
there be several different form of leishmaniasis .
the most common be a localize cutaneous form of the illness cause by l . tropica , which typically resolve spontaneously over time but with some significant lymphocyte infiltration and permanent scarring .
a mucocutaneous form of the disease , cause by l . viannia brasilienfsis , produce lesion in the tissue of the nose and mouth and can be life threaten .
a visceral form of the illness can be cause by several of the different leishmania specie .
- pron - affect various organ system and cause abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen .
irregular fever , anemia , liver dysfunction , and weight loss be all sign and symptom of visceral leishmaniasis .
if leave untreated , - pron - be typically fatal .
figure one  seven  .  two  two ( a )
cutaneous leishmaniasis be a disfigure disease cause by the intracellular flagellate leishmania tropica , transmit by the bite of a sand fly .
( b )
this light micrograph of a sample take from a skin lesion show a large cell , which be a macrophage infect with l . tropica amastigote ( arrow ) .
the amastigote have lose - pron - flagella but - pron - nucleus be visible .
soon the amastigote will lyse the macrophage and be engulf by other phagocyte , spread the infection .
( credit a  modification of work by otis historical archives of “ national museum of health and medicine "  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) one .
world health organization .
“
leishmaniasis .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs three  seven  five  / en / . seven  six  six chapter one  seven

innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five one  seven  .  five inflammation and fever learning objectives
 identify the sign of inflammation and fever and explain why - pron - occur 
explain the advantage and risk pose by inflammatory response the inflammatory response , or inflammation , be trigger by a cascade of chemical mediator and cellular response that may occur when cell be damage and stress or when pathogen successfully breach the physical barrier of the innate immune system .
although inflammation be typically associate with negative consequence of injury or disease , - pron - be a necessary process insofar as - pron - allow for recruitment of the cellular defense need to eliminate pathogen , remove damaged and dead cell , and initiate repair mechanism .
excessive inflammation , however , can result in local tissue damage and , in severe case , may even become deadly .
acute inflammation
an early , if not immediate , response to tissue injury be acute inflammation .
immediately follow an injury , vasoconstriction of blood vessel will occur to minimize blood loss .
the amount of vasoconstriction be relate to the amount of vascular injury , but - pron - be usually brief .
vasoconstriction be follow by vasodilation and increase vascular permeability , as a direct result of the release of histamine from resident mast cell .
increase blood flow and vascular permeability can dilute toxin and bacterial product at the site of injury or infection .
- pron - also contribute to the five observable sign associate with the inflammatory response  erythema ( redness ) , edema ( swell ) , heat , pain , and altered function .
vasodilation and increase vascular permeability be also associate with an influx of phagocyte at the site of injury and / or infection .
this can enhance the inflammatory response because phagocyte may release proinflammatory chemical when - pron - be activate by cellular distress signal release from damaged cell , by pamp , or by opsonin on the surface of pathogen .
activation of the complement system can further enhance the inflammatory response through the production of the anaphylatoxin
c five a .
figure one  seven  .  two  three illustrate a typical case of acute inflammation at the site of a skin wound .
figure one  seven  .  two  three ( a )
mast cell detect injury to nearby cell and release histamine , initiate an inflammatory response .
( b ) histamine increase blood flow to the wound site , and increase vascular permeability allow fluid , protein , phagocyte , and other immune cell to enter infected tissue .
these event result in the swelling and reddening of the injure site , and the increase blood flow to the injure site cause - pron - to feel warm .
inflammation be also associate with pain due to these event stimulate nerve pain receptor in the tissue .
the interaction of phagocyte prr with cellular distress signal and pamp and opsonin on the surface of pathogen lead to the release of more proinflammatory chemical , enhance the inflammatory response .
during the period of inflammation , the release of bradykinin cause capillary to remain dilated , flood tissue with chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  six  seven fluid and lead to edema .
increase number of neutrophil be recruit to the area to fight pathogen .
as the fight rage on , pus form from the accumulation of neutrophil , dead cell , tissue fluid , and lymph .
typically , after a few day , macrophage will help to clear out this pus .
eventually , tissue repair can begin in the wounded area .
chronic inflammation
when acute inflammation be unable to clear an infectious pathogen , chronic inflammation may occur .
this often result in an ongoing ( and sometimes futile ) low - level battle between the host organism and the pathogen .
the wounded area may heal at a superficial level , but pathogen may still be present in deep tissue , stimulate ongoing inflammation .
additionally , chronic inflammation may be involve in the progression of degenerative neurological disease such as alzheimer 's and parkinson 's , heart disease , and metastatic cancer .
chronic inflammation may lead to the formation of granuloma , pocket of infected tissue wall off and surround by wbc .
macrophage and other phagocyte wage an unsuccessful battle to eliminate the pathogen and dead cellular material within a granuloma .
one example of a disease that produce chronic inflammation be tuberculosis , which result in the formation of granuloma in lung tissue .
a tubercular granuloma be call a tubercle ( figure one  seven  .  two  four ) .
tuberculosis will be cover in more detail in bacterial infections of the respiratory tract .
chronic inflammation be not just associate with bacterial infection .
chronic inflammation can be an important cause of tissue damage from viral infection .
the extensive scar observe with hepatitis c infection and liver cirrhosis be the result of chronic inflammation .
figure one  seven  .  two  four
a tubercle be a granuloma in the lung tissue of a patient with tuberculosis .
in this micrograph , white blood cell ( stain purple ) have wall off a pocket of tissue infect with mycobacterium tuberculosis .
granulomas also occur in many other form of disease .
( credit  modification of work by piotrowski wj , górski p , duda - szymańska j , kwiatkowska s )

name the five sign of inflammation .

be a granuloma an acute or chronic form of inflammation ?
explain .
chronic edema
in addition to granuloma , chronic inflammation can also result in long - term edema .
a condition know as lymphatic filariasis ( also know as elephantiasis ) provide an extreme example .
lymphatic filariasis be cause by microscopic nematode ( parasitic worm ) whose larvae be transmit between human host micro connections seven  six  eight chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five by mosquito .
adult worm live in the lymphatic vessel , where - pron - presence stimulate infiltration by lymphocyte , plasma cell , eosinophil , and thrombocyte ( a condition know as lymphangitis ) .
because of the chronic nature of the illness , granuloma , fibrosis , and blocking of the lymphatic system may eventually occur .
over time , these blockage may worsen with repeated infection over decade , lead to skin thicken with edema and fibrosis .
lymph ( extracellular tissue fluid ) may spill out of the lymphatic area and back into tissue , cause extreme swelling ( figure one  seven  .  two  five ) .
secondary bacterial infection commonly follow .
because - pron - be a disease cause by a parasite , eosinophilia ( a dramatic rise in the number of eosinophil in the blood ) be characteristic of acute infection .
however , this increase in antiparasite granulocyte be not sufficient to clear the infection in many case .
lymphatic filariasis affect an estimate one  two  zero million people worldwide , mostly concentrate in africa and asia . [ two ]
improve sanitation and mosquito control can reduce transmission rate .
figure one  seven  .  two  five elephantiasis ( chronic edema ) of the leg due to filariasis .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
fever a fever be an inflammatory response that extend beyond the site of infection and affect the entire body , result in an overall increase in body temperature .
body temperature be normally regulate and maintain by the hypothalamus , an anatomical section of the brain that function to maintain homeostasis in the body .
however , certain bacterial or viral infection can result in the production of pyrogen , chemical that effectively alter the “ thermostat setting " of the hypothalamus to elevate body temperature and cause fever .
pyrogens may be exogenous or endogenous .
for example , the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) , produce by gram - negative bacteria , be an exogenous pyrogen that may induce the leukocyte to release endogenous pyrogen such as interleukin -  one ( il -  one ) , il -  six , interferon - γ ( ifn - γ ) , and tumor necrosis factor ( tnf ) .
in a cascade effect , these molecule can then lead to the release of prostaglandin e two ( pge two ) from other cell , reset the hypothalamus to initiate fever ( figure one  seven  .  two  six ) .
two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
parasites – lymphatic filiariasis .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / lymphaticfilariasis / gen_info / faqs . html .
chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses
seven  six  nine figure one  seven  .  two  six
the role of the hypothalamus in the inflammatory response .
macrophage recognize pathogen in an area and release cytokine that trigger inflammation .
the cytokine also send a signal up the vagus nerve to the hypothalamus .
like other form of inflammation , a fever enhance the innate immune defense by stimulate leukocyte to kill pathogen .
the rise in body temperature also may inhibit the growth of many pathogen since human pathogen be mesophile with optimum growth occur around three  five ° c ( nine  five ° f ) .
in addition , some study suggest that fever may also stimulate release of iron - sequester compound from the liver , thereby starve out microbe that rely on iron for growth . [ three ]
during fever , the skin may appear pale due to vasoconstriction of the blood vessel in the skin , which be mediate by the hypothalamus to divert blood flow away from extremity , minimize the loss of heat and raise the core temperature .
the hypothalamus will also stimulate shivering of muscle , another effective mechanism of generate heat and raise the core temperature .
the crisis phase occur when the fever break .
the hypothalamus stimulate vasodilation , result in a return of blood flow to the skin and a subsequent release of heat from the body .
the hypothalamus also stimulate sweat , which cool the skin as the sweat evaporate .
although a low - level fever may help an individual overcome an illness , in some instance , this immune response can be too strong , cause tissue and organ damage and , in severe case , even death .
the inflammatory response to bacterial superantigen be one scenario in which a life - threaten fever may develop .
superantigen be bacterial or viral protein that can cause an excessive activation of t cell from the specific adaptive immune defense , as well as an excessive release of cytokine that overstimulate the inflammatory response .
for example , staphylococcus aureus and streptococcus pyogene be capable of produce superantigen that cause toxic shock syndrome and scarlet fever , respectively .
both of these condition can be associate with very high , life - threaten fever in excess of four  two ° c ( one  zero  eight ° f ) .

explain the difference between exogenous and endogenous pyrogen .

how do a fever inhibit pathogen ?
three .
n . parrow et al .
“
sequestration and scavenging of iron in infection .
”
infection and immunity eight  one no .
one  zero
( two  zero  one  three  )  three  five  zero  three – three  five  one  four seven  seven  zero chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five resolution
give - pron - father 's premature death , angela 's doctor suspect that - pron - have hereditary angioedema , a genetic disorder that compromise the function of c one inhibitor protein .
patient with this genetic abnormality may have occasional episode of swell in various part of the body .
in angela 's case , the swelling have occur in the respiratory tract , lead to difficulty breathing .
swelling may also occur in the gastrointestinal tract , cause abdominal cramping , diarrhea , and vomiting , or in the muscle of the face or limb .
this swelling may be nonresponsive to steroid treatment and be often misdiagnose as an allergy .
because there be three type of hereditary angioedema , the doctor order a more specific blood test to look for level of c one  - inh , as well as a functional assay of angela 's c one inhibitor .
the result suggest that angela have type i hereditary angioedema , which account for eight  zero %– eight  five % of all case .
this form of the disorder be cause by a deficiency in c one esterase inhibitor , the protein that normally help suppress activation of the complement system .
when these protein be deficient or nonfunctional , overstimulation of the system can lead to production of inflammatory anaphylatoxin , which result in swell and fluid buildup in tissue .
there be no cure for hereditary angioedema , but timely treatment with purified and concentrate c one  - inh from blood donor can be effective , prevent tragic outcome like the one suffer by angela 's father .
a number of therapeutic drug , either currently approve or in late - stage human trial , may also be consider as option for treatment in the near future .
these drug work by inhibit inflammatory molecule or the receptor for inflammatory molecule .
thankfully , angela 's condition be quickly diagnose and treat .
although - pron - may experience additional episode in the future , - pron - prognosis be good and - pron - can expect to live a relatively normal life provide
- pron - seek treatment at the onset of symptom .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary one  seven  .  one physical defenses

nonspecific innate immunity provide a first line of defense against infection by nonspecifically block entry of microbe and target - pron - for destruction or removal from the body .

the physical defense of innate immunity include physical barrier , mechanical action that remove microbe and debris , and the microbiome , which compete with and inhibit the growth of pathogen .

the skin , mucous membrane , and endothelium throughout the body serve as physical barrier that prevent microbe from reach potential site of infection .
tight cell junction in these tissue prevent microbe from pass through .

microbes trap in dead skin cell or mucus be remove from the body by mechanical action such as shedding of skin cell , mucociliary sweeping , coughing , peristalsis , and flush of bodily fluid ( e . g . , urination , tear ) 
the resident microbiota provide a physical defense by occupy available cellular bind site and compete with pathogen for available nutrient .
one  seven  .  two chemical defenses

numerous chemical mediator produce endogenously and exogenously exhibit nonspecific antimicrobial function .

many chemical mediator be find in body fluid such as sebum , saliva , mucus , gastric and intestinal fluid , urine , tear , ceruman , and vaginal secretion .

antimicrobial peptide ( amp ) find on the skin and in other area of the body be largely produce in response to the presence of pathogen .
these include dermcidin , cathelicidin , defensin , histatin , and clinical focus chapter one  seven
 innate nonspecific host defenses seven  seven  one bacteriocin .

plasma contain various protein that serve as chemical mediator , include acute - phase protein , complement protein , and cytokine .

the complement system involve numerous precursor protein that circulate in plasma .
these protein become activated in a cascading sequence in the presence of microbe , result in the opsonization of pathogen , chemoattraction of leukocyte , induction of inflammation , and cytolysis through the formation of a membrane attack complex ( mac ) .

cytokine be protein that facilitate various nonspecific response by innate immune cell , include production of other chemical mediator , cell proliferation , cell death , and differentiation .

cytokines play a key role in the inflammatory response , trigger production of inflammation - elicit mediator such as acute - phase protein , histamine , leukotriene , prostaglandin , and bradykinin .
one  seven  .  three cellular defenses

the form element of the blood include red blood cell ( erythrocyte ) , white blood cell ( leukocyte ) , and platelet ( thrombocyte ) .
of these , leukocyte be primarily involve in the immune response .

all form element originate in the bone marrow as stem cell ( hsc ) that differentiate through hematopoiesis .

granulocyte be leukocyte characterize by a lob nucleus and granule in the cytoplasm .
these include neutrophil ( pmns ) , eosinophil , and basophil .

neutrophils be the leukocyte find in the large number in the bloodstream and - pron - primarily fight bacterial infection .

eosinophils target parasitic infection .
eosinophil and basophil be involve in allergic reaction .
both release histamine and other proinflammatory compound from - pron - granule upon stimulation .

mast cell function similarly to basophil but can be find in tissue outside the bloodstream .
 natural killer ( nk ) cell be lymphocyte that recognize and kill abnormal or infected cell by release protein that trigger apoptosis .

monocytes be large , mononuclear leukocyte that circulate in the bloodstream .
- pron - may leave the bloodstream and take up residence in body tissue , where - pron - differentiate and become tissue - specific macrophage and dendritic cell .
one  seven  .  four pathogen recognition and phagocytosis

phagocytes be cell that recognize pathogen and destroy - pron - through phagocytosis .

recognition often take place by the use of phagocyte receptor that bind molecule commonly find on pathogen , know as pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) .

the receptor that bind pamp be call pattern recognition receptor , or prr .
toll - like receptor ( tlr ) be one type of prr find on phagocyte .

extravasation of white blood cell from the bloodstream into infected tissue occur through the process of transendothelial migration .

phagocytes degrade pathogen through phagocytosis , which involve engulf the pathogen , kill and digest - pron - within a phagolysosome , and then excrete undigested matter .
one  seven  .  five inflammation and fever  inflammation result from the collective response of chemical mediator and cellular defense to an injury or infection .

acute inflammation be short live and localize to the site of injury or infection .
chronic inflammation occur when the inflammatory response be unsuccessful , and may result in the formation of granuloma ( e . g . , with tuberculosis ) and scar ( e . g . , with hepatitis c viral infection and liver cirrhosis ) .

the five cardinal sign of inflammation be erythema , edema , heat , pain , and altered function .
these largely result from innate response that draw increase blood flow to the injure or infect tissue .
seven  seven  two chapter one  seven 
innate nonspecific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  fever be a system - wide sign of inflammation that raise the body temperature and stimulate the immune response .

both inflammation and fever can be harmful if the inflammatory response be too severe .
chapter one  eight adaptive specific host defenses figure
one  eight  .  one polio be once a common disease with potentially serious consequence , include paralysis .
vaccination have all but eliminate the disease from most country around the world .
an iron - lung ward , such as the one show in this one  nine  five  three photograph , housed patient paralyze from polio and unable to breathe for - pron - .
chapter outline one  eight  .  one overview of specific adaptive immunity one  eight  .  two major histocompatibility complexes and antigen - presenting cell one  eight  .  three t lymphocytes and cellular immunity one  eight  .  four b lymphocytes and humoral immunity one  eight  .  five vaccines introduction people live in developed nation and bear in the one  nine  six  zero or later may have difficulty understand the once heavy burden of devastate infectious disease .
for example , smallpox , a deadly viral disease , once destroy entire civilization but have since be eradicate .
thank to the vaccination effort by multiple group , include the world health organization , rotary international , and the united nations children 's fund ( unicef ) , smallpox have not be diagnose in a patient since one  nine  seven  seven .
polio be another excellent example .
this crippling viral disease paralyzed patient , who be often keep alive in “ iron lung ward " as recently as the one  nine  five  zero ( figure one  eight  .  one ) .
today , vaccination against polio have nearly eradicate the disease .
vaccine have also reduce the prevalence of once - common infectious disease such as chickenpox , german measle , measle , mump , and whooping cough .
the success of these and other vaccine be due to the very specific and adaptive host defense that be the focus of this chapter .
innate nonspecific host defenses describe innate immunity against microbial pathogen .
high animal , such as human , also possess an adaptive immune defense , which be highly specific for individual microbial pathogen .
this specific adaptive immunity be acquire through active infection or vaccination and serve as an important defense against pathogen that evade the defense of innate immunity .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses seven  seven  seven one  eight  .  one overview of specific adaptive immunity learning objectives 
define memory , primary response , secondary response , and specificity

distinguish between humoral and cellular immunity 
differentiate between antigen , epitope , and hapten 
describe the structure and function of antibody and distinguish between the different class of antibody
adaptive immunity be define by two important characteristic  specificity and memory .
specificity refer to the adaptive immune system 's ability to target specific pathogen , and memory refer to - pron - ability to quickly respond to pathogen to which - pron - have previously be expose .
for example , when an individual recover from chickenpox , the body develop a memory of the infection that will specifically protect - pron - from the causative agent , the varicella - zoster virus , if - pron - be expose to the virus again later .
specificity and memory be achieve by essentially program certain cell involve in the immune response to respond rapidly to subsequent exposure of the pathogen .
this programming occur as a result of the first exposure to a pathogen or vaccine , which trigger a primary response .
subsequent exposure result in a secondary response that be fast and strong as a result of the body 's memory of the first exposure ( figure one  eight  .  two ) .
this secondary response , however , be specific to the pathogen in question .
for example , exposure to one virus ( e . g . , varicella - zoster virus ) will not provide protection against other viral disease ( e . g . , measle , mump , or polio ) .
adaptive specific immunity involve the action of two distinct cell type  b lymphocyte ( b cell ) and t lymphocyte ( t cell ) .
although b cell and t cell arise from a common hematopoietic stem cell differentiation pathway ( see figure one  seven  .  one  two ) , - pron - site of maturation and - pron - role in adaptive immunity be very different .
b cell mature in the bone marrow and be responsible for the production of glycoprotein call antibody , or immunoglobulin .
antibody be involve in the body 's defense against pathogen and toxin in the extracellular environment .
mechanism of adaptive specific immunity that involve b cell and antibody production be refer to as humoral immunity .
the maturation of t cell occur in the thymus .
t cell function as the central orchestrator of both innate and adaptive immune response .
- pron - be also responsible for destruction of cell infect with intracellular pathogen .
the targeting and destruction of intracellular pathogen by t cell be call cell - mediate immunity , or cellular immunity .
part one olivia , a one - year old infant , be bring to the emergency room by - pron - parent , who report - pron - symptom  excessive crying , irritability , sensitivity to light , unusual lethargy , and vomiting .
a physician feel swollen lymph node in olivia 's throat and armpit .
in addition , the area of the abdoman over the spleen be swollen and tender .

what do these symptom suggest ?

what test may be order to try to diagnose the problem ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus seven  seven  eight chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  two
this graph illustrate the primary and secondary immune response relate to antibody production after an initial and secondary exposure to an antigen .
notice that the secondary response be fast and provide a much high concentration of antibody .

list the two define characteristic of adaptive immunity .

explain the difference between a primary and secondary immune response .

how do humoral and cellular immunity differ ?
antigens activation of the adaptive immune defense be trigger by pathogen - specific molecular structure call antigen .
antigen be similar to the pathogen - associate molecular pattern ( pamps ) discuss in pathogen recognition and phagocytosis  however , whereas pamp be molecular structure find on numerous pathogen , antigen be unique to a specific pathogen .
the antigen that stimulate adaptive immunity to chickenpox , for example , be unique to the varicella - zoster virus but significantly different from the antigen associate with other viral pathogen .
the term antigen be initially use to describe molecule that stimulate the production of antibody  in fact , the term come from a combination of the word antibody and generator , and a molecule that stimulate antibody production be say to be antigenic .
however , the role of antigen be not limit to humoral immunity and the production of antibody  antigen also play an essential role in stimulate cellular immunity , and for this reason antigen be sometimes more accurately refer to as immunogen .
in this text , however , - pron - will typically refer to - pron - as antigen .
pathogen possess a variety of structure that may contain antigen .
for example , antigen from bacterial cell may be associate with - pron - capsule , cell wall , fimbriae , flagella , or pili .
bacterial antigen may also be associate with extracellular toxin and enzyme that - pron - secrete .
virus possess a variety of antigen associate with - pron - capsid , envelope , and the spike structure - pron - use for attachment to cell .
antigen may belong to any number of molecular class , include carbohydrate , lipid , nucleic acid , protein , and combination of these molecule .
antigen of different class vary in - pron - ability to stimulate adaptive immune defense as well as in the type of response - pron - stimulate ( humoral or cellular ) .
the structural complexity of an antigenic molecule be an important factor in - pron - antigenic potential .
in general , more complex molecule be more effective as antigen .
for example , the three - dimensional complex structure of protein make - pron - the most effective and potent antigen , capable of stimulate both humoral and cellular immunity .
in comparison , carbohydrate be chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense seven  seven  nine less complex in structure and therefore less effective as antigen  - pron - can only stimulate humoral immune defense .
lipid and nucleic acid be the least antigenic molecule , and in some case may only become antigenic when combine with protein or carbohydrate to form glycolipid , lipoprotein , or nucleoprotein .
one reason the three - dimensional complexity of antigen be so important be that antibody and t cell do not recognize and interact with an entire antigen but with small expose region on the surface of antigen call epitope .
a single antigen may possess several different epitope ( figure one  eight  .  three ) , and different antibody may bind to different epitope on the same antigen ( figure one  eight  .  four ) .
for example , the bacterial flagellum be a large , complex protein structure that can possess hundred or even thousand of epitope with unique three - dimensional structure .
moreover , flagella from different bacterial specie ( or even strain of the same specie ) contain unique epitope that can only be bind by specific antibody .
an antigen 's size be another important factor in - pron - antigenic potential .
whereas large antigenic structure like flagella possess multiple epitope , some molecule be too small to be antigenic by - pron - .
such molecule , call hapten , be essentially free epitope that be not part of the complex three - dimensional structure of a large antigen .
for a hapten to become antigenic , - pron - must first attach to a large carrier molecule ( usually a protein ) to produce a conjugate antigen .
the hapten - specific antibody produce in response to the conjugate antigen be then able to interact with unconjugated free hapten molecule .
hapten be not know to be associate with any specific pathogen , but - pron - be responsible for some allergic response .
for example , the hapten urushiol , a molecule find in the oil of plant that cause poison ivy , cause an immune response that can result in a severe rash ( call contact dermatitis ) .
similarly , the hapten penicillin can cause allergic reaction to drug in the penicillin class .
figure one  eight  .  three
an antigen be a macromolecule that react with component of the immune system .
a give antigen may contain several motif that be recognize by immune cell .
seven  eight  zero chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  four
a typical protein antigen have multiple epitope , show by the ability of three different antibody to bind to different epitope of the same antigen .

what be the difference between an antigen and an epitope ?

what factor affect an antigen 's antigenic potential ?

why be hapten typically not antigenic , and how do - pron - become antigenic ?
antibodies antibodies ( also call immunoglobulin ) be glycoprotein that be present in both the blood and tissue fluid .
the basic structure of an antibody monomer consist of four protein chain hold together by disulfide bond ( figure one  eight  .  five ) .
a disulfide bond be a covalent bond between the sulfhydryl r group find on two cysteine amino acid .
the two large chain be identical to each other and be call the heavy chain .
the two small chain be also identical to each other and be call the light chain .
join together , the heavy and light chain form a basic yshaped structure .
the two ‘ arm ' of the y - shape antibody molecule be know as the fab region , for “ fragment of antigen binding .
"
the far end of the fab region be the variable region , which serve as the site of antigen binding .
the amino acid sequence in the variable region dictate the three - dimensional structure , and thus the specific three - dimensional epitope to which the fab region be capable of bind .
although the epitope specificity of the fab region be identical for each arm of a single antibody molecule , this region display a high degree of variability between antibody with different epitope specificity .
bind to the fab region be necessary for neutralization of pathogen , agglutination or chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
seven  eight  one aggregation of pathogen , and antibody - dependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity .
the constant region of the antibody molecule include the trunk of the y and low portion of each arm of the y .
the trunk of the y be also call the fc region , for “ fragment of crystallization , " and be the site of complement factor bind and bind to phagocytic cell during antibody - mediate opsonization .
figure one  eight  .  five ( a )
the typical four - chain structure of a generic antibody monomer .
( b )
the correspond threedimensional structure of the antibody igg . ( credit b  modification of work by tim vickers )

describe the different function of the fab region and the fc region .
antibody class
the constant region of an antibody molecule determine - pron - class , or isotype .
the five class of antibody be igg , igm , iga , igd , and ige .
each class possess unique heavy chain designate by greek letter γ , μ , α , δ , and ε , respectively .
antibody class also exhibit important difference in abundance in serum , arrangement , body site of action , functional role , and size ( figure one  eight  .  six ) .
igg be a monomer that be by far the most abundant antibody in human blood , account for about eight  zero % of total serum antibody .
igg penetrate efficiently into tissue space , and be the only antibody class with the ability to cross the placental barrier , provide passive immunity to the develop fetus during pregnancy .
igg be also the most versatile antibody class in term of - pron - role in the body 's defense against pathogen .
igm be initially produce in a monomeric membrane - bind form that serve as an antigen - bind receptor on b cell .
the secrete form of igm assemble into a pentamer with five monomer of igm bind together by a protein structure call the j chain .
although the location of the j chain relative to the fc region of the five monomer prevent igm from perform some of the function of igg , the ten available fab site associate with a pentameric igm make - pron - an important antibody in the body 's arsenal of defense .
igm be the first antibody produce and secrete by b cell during the primary and secondary immune response , make pathogen - specific igm a valuable diagnostic marker during active or recent infection .
iga account for about one  three % of total serum antibody , and secretory iga be the most common and abundant antibody class find in the mucus secretion that protect the mucous membrane .
iga can also be find in other secretion such as breast milk , tear , and saliva .
secretory iga be assemble into a dimeric form with two monomer join by a protein structure call the secretory component .
one of the important function of secretory iga be to trap pathogen seven  eight  two chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five in mucus so that - pron - can later be eliminate from the body .
similar to igm , igd be a membrane - bind monomer find on the surface of b cell , where - pron - serve as an antigenbinde receptor .
however , igd be not secrete by b cell , and only trace amount be detect in serum .
these trace amount most likely come from the degradation of old b cell and the release of igd molecule from - pron - cytoplasmic membrane .
ige be the least abundant antibody class in serum .
like igg , - pron - be secrete as a monomer , but - pron - role in adaptive immunity be restrict to anti - parasitic defense .
the fc region of ige bind to basophil and mast cell .
the fab region of the bind ige then interact with specific antigen epitope , cause the cell to release potent proinflammatory mediator .
the inflammatory reaction result from the activation of mast cell and basophil aid in the defense against parasite , but this reaction be also central to allergic reaction ( see disease of the immune system .
figure one  eight  .  six chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense seven  eight  three

what part of an antibody molecule determine - pron - class ?

what class of antibody be involve in protection against parasite ?

describe the difference in structure between igm and igg . antigen - antibody interaction different class of antibody play important role in the body 's defense against pathogen .
these function include neutralization of pathogen , opsonization for phagocytosis , agglutination , complement activation , and antibodydependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity .
for most of these function , antibody also provide an important link between adaptive specific immunity and innate nonspecific immunity .
neutralization involve the binding of certain antibody ( igg , igm , or iga ) to epitope on the surface of pathogen or toxin , prevent - pron - attachment to cell .
for example , secretory iga can bind to specific pathogen and block initial attachment to intestinal mucosal cell .
similarly , specific antibody can bind to certain toxin , block - pron - from attach to target cell and thus neutralize - pron - toxic effect .
virus can be neutralize and prevent from infect a cell by the same mechanism ( figure one  eight  .  seven ) .
as describe in chemical defenses , opsonization be the coating of a pathogen with molecule , such as complement factor , c - reactive protein , and serum amyloid a , to assist in phagocyte bind to facilitate phagocytosis .
igg antibody also serve as excellent opsonin , bind - pron - fab site to specific epitope on the surface of pathogen .
phagocytic cell such as macrophage , dendritic cell , and neutrophil have receptor on - pron - surface that recognize and bind to the fc portion of the igg molecule  thus , igg help such phagocyte attach to and engulf the pathogen - pron - have bind ( figure one  eight  .  eight ) .
agglutination or aggregation involve the cross - linking of pathogen by antibody to create large aggregate ( figure one  eight  .  nine ) .
igg have two fab antigen - bind site , which can bind to two separate pathogen cell , clump - pron - together .
when multiple igg antibody be involve , large aggregate can develop  these aggregate be easy for the kidney and spleen to filter from the blood and easy for phagocyte to ingest for destruction .
the pentameric structure of igm provide ten fab bind site per molecule , make - pron - the most efficient antibody for agglutination .
figure one  eight  .  seven neutralization involve the binding of specific antibody to antigen find on bacteria , virus , and toxin , prevent - pron - from attach to target cell .
seven  eight  four chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  eight antibody serve as opsonin and inhibit infection by tag pathogen for destruction by macrophage , dendritic cell , and neutrophil .
these phagocytic cell use fc receptor to bind to igg - opsonize pathogen and initiate the first step of attachment before phagocytosis .
figure one  eight  .  nine antibody , especially igm antibody , agglutinate bacteria by bind to epitope on two or more bacteria simultaneously .
when multiple pathogen and antibody be present , aggregate form when the bind site of antibody bind with separate pathogen .
another important function of antibody be activation of the complement cascade .
as discuss in the previous chapter , the complement system be an important component of the innate defense , promote the inflammatory response , recruit phagocyte to site of infection , enhance phagocytosis by opsonization , and kill gramnegative bacterial pathogen with the membrane attack complex ( mac ) .
complement activation can occur through three different pathway ( see figure one  seven  .  nine ) , but the most efficient be the classical pathway , which require the initial binding of igg or igm antibody to the surface of a pathogen cell , allow for recruitment and activation of the c one complex .
yet another important function of antibody be antibody - dependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity ( adcc ) , which enhance killing of pathogen that be too large to be phagocytose .
this process be best characterize for natural killer cell ( nk cell ) , as show in figure one  eight  .  one  zero , but - pron - can also involve macrophage and eosinophil .
adcc occur chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense seven  eight  five when the fab region of an igg antibody bind to a large pathogen  fc receptor on effector cell ( e . g . , nk cell ) then bind to the fc region of the antibody , bring - pron - into close proximity with the target pathogen .
the effector cell then secrete powerful cytotoxin ( e . g . , perforin and granzyme ) that kill the pathogen .
figure one  eight  .  one  zero
in this example of adcc , antibody bind to a large pathogenic cell that be too big for phagocytosis and then bind to fc receptor on the membrane of a natural killer cell .
this interaction bring the nk cell into close proximity , where - pron - can kill the pathogen through release of lethal extracellular cytotoxin .

where be iga normally find ?

which class of antibody cross the placenta , provide protection to the fetus ?

compare the mechanism of opsonization and antibody - dependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity .
one  eight  .  two major histocompatibility complexes and antigen - presenting cells
learning objectives
 identify cell that express mhc i and / or mhc ii molecule and describe the structure and cellular location of mhc i and mhc ii molecule
 identify the cell that be antigen - present cell
 describe the process of antigen processing and presentation with mhc i and mhc ii
as discuss in cellular defenses , major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) molecule be express on the surface of healthy cell , identify - pron - as normal and " self " to natural killer ( nk ) cell .
mhc molecule also play an important role in the presentation of foreign antigen , which be a critical step in the activation of t cell and thus an important mechanism of the adaptive immune system .
major histocompatibility complex molecules
the major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) be a collection of gene code for mhc molecule find on the surface of all nucleated cell of the body .
in human , the mhc gene be also refer to as human leukocyte antigen ( hla ) gene .
mature red blood cell , which lack a nucleus , be the only cell that do not express mhc molecule on - pron - surface .
seven  eight  six chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five there be two class of mhc molecule involve in adaptive immunity , mhc i and mhc ii ( figure one  eight  .  one  one ) .
mhc i molecule be find on all nucleated cell  - pron - present normal self - antigen as well as abnormal or nonself pathogen to the effector t cell involve in cellular immunity .
in contrast , mhc ii molecule be only find on macrophage , dendritic cell , and b cell  - pron - present abnormal or nonself pathogen antigen for the initial activation of t cell .
both type of mhc molecule be transmembrane glycoprotein that assemble as dimer in the cytoplasmic membrane of cell , but - pron - structure be quite different .
mhc i molecule be compose of a long α protein chain couple with a small β two microglobulin protein , and only the α chain span the cytoplasmic membrane .
the α chain of the mhc i molecule fold into three separate domain  α one , α two and α three .
mhc ii molecule be compose of two protein chain ( an α and a β chain ) that be approximately similar in length .
both chain of the mhc ii molecule possess portion that span the plasma membrane , and each chain fold into two separate domain  α one and α two , and β one , and β two .
in order to present abnormal or non - self - antigen to t cell , mhc molecule have a cleft that serve as the antigen - bind site near the " top " ( or outermost ) portion of the mhc - i or mhc - ii dimer .
for mhc i , the antigenbinding cleft be form by the α one and α two domain , whereas for mhc ii , the cleft be form by the α one and β one domain ( figure one  eight  .  one  one ) .
figure one  eight  .  one  one
mhc i be find on all nucleate body cell , and mhc ii be find on macrophage , dendritic cell , and b cell ( along with mhc i ) .
the antigen - binding cleft of mhc i be form by domain α one and α two .
the antigenbinding cleft of mhc ii be form by domain α one and β one .

compare the structure of the mhc i and mhc ii molecule .
antigen - presenting cell ( apcs )
all nucleate cell in the body have mechanism for processing and present antigen in association with mhc molecule .
this signal the immune system , indicate whether the cell be normal and healthy or infect with an intracellular pathogen .
however , only macrophage , dendritic cell , and b cell have the ability to present antigen specifically for the purpose of activate t cell  for this reason , these type of cell be sometimes refer to as antigen - present cell ( apcs ) .
while all apc play a similar role in adaptive immunity , there be some important difference to consider .
macrophage and dendritic cell be phagocyte that ingest and kill pathogen that penetrate the first - line barrier ( i . e . , skin and mucous membrane ) .
b cell , on the other hand , do not function as phagocyte but play a primary role in chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defenses seven  eight  seven the production and secretion of antibody .
in addition , whereas macrophage and dendritic cell recognize pathogen through nonspecific receptor interaction ( e . g . , pamp , toll - like receptor , and receptor for opsonize complement or antibody ) , b cell interact with foreign pathogen or - pron - free antigen use antigen - specific immunoglobulin as receptor ( monomeric igd and igm ) .
when the immunoglobulin receptor bind to an antigen , the b cell internalize the antigen by endocytosis before processing and presentte the antigen to t cell .
antigen presentation with mhc ii molecules mhc ii molecule be only find on the surface of apc .
macrophage and dendritic cell use similar mechanism for processing and presentation of antigen and - pron - epitope in association with mhc ii  b cell use somewhat different mechanism that will be describe further in b lymphocytes and humoral immunity .
for now , - pron - will focus on the step of the process as - pron - pertain to dendritic cell .
after a dendritic cell recognize and attach to a pathogen cell , the pathogen be internalize by phagocytosis and be initially contain within a phagosome .
lysosome contain antimicrobial enzyme and chemical fuse with the phagosome to create a phagolysosome , where degradation of the pathogen for antigen processing begin .
protease ( protein - degrading ) be especially important in antigen processing because only protein antigen epitope be present to t cell by mhc ii ( figure one  eight  .  one  two ) .
apc do not present all possible epitope to t cell  only a selection of the most antigenic or immunodominant epitope be present .
the mechanism by which epitope be select for processing and presentation by an apc be complicated and not well understand  however , once the most antigenic , immunodominant epitope have be process , - pron - associate within the antigen - binding cleft of mhc ii molecule and be translocate to the cell surface of the dendritic cell for presentation to t cell .
figure one  eight  .  one  two
a dendritic cell phagocytose a bacterial cell and bring - pron - into a phagosome .
lysosome fuse with the phagosome to create a phagolysosome , where antimicrobial chemical and enzyme degrade the bacterial cell .
protease process bacterial antigen , and the most antigenic epitope be select and present on the cell 's surface in conjunction with mhc ii molecule .
t cell recognize the present antigen and be thus activate .
seven  eight  eight chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be the three kind of apc ?

what role to mhc ii molecule play in antigen presentation ?

what be the role of antigen presentation in adaptive immunity ?
antigen presentation with
mhc i molecules
mhc i molecule ,
find on all normal , healthy , nucleated cell , signal to the immune system that the cell be a normal " self " cell .
in a healthy cell , protein normally find in the cytoplasm be degrade by proteasome ( enzyme complex responsible for degradation and processing of protein ) and process into self - antigen epitope  these self - antigen epitope bind within the mhc i antigen - binding cleave and be then present on the cell surface .
immune cell , such as nk cell , recognize these self - antigen and do not target the cell for destruction .
however , if a cell become infect with an intracellular pathogen ( e . g . , a virus ) , protein antigen specific to the pathogen be process in the proteasome and bind with mhc i molecule for presentation on the cell surface .
this presentation of pathogenspecific antigen with mhc i signal that the infect cell must be target for destruction along with the pathogen .
before elimination of infected cell can begin , apc must first activate the t cell involve in cellular immunity .
if an intracellular pathogen directly infect the cytoplasm of an apc , then the processing and presentation of antigen can occur as describe ( in proteasome and on the cell surface with mhc i ) .
however , if the intracellular pathogen do not directly infect apc , an alternative strategy call cross - presentation be utilize .
in cross - presentation , antigen be bring into the apc by mechanism normally lead to presentation with mhc ii ( i . e . , through phagocytosis ) , but the antigen be present on an mhc i molecule for cd eight t cell .
the exact mechanism by which cross - presentation occur be not yet well understand , but - pron - appear that cross - presentation be primarily a function of dendritic cell and not macrophage or b cell .

compare and contrast antigen processing and presentation associate with mhc i and mhc ii molecule .

what be cross - presentation , and when be - pron - likely to occur ?
one  eight  .  three t lymphocytes and cellular immunity learning objectives
 describe the process of t - cell maturation and thymic selection

explain the genetic event that lead to diversity of t - cell receptor  compare and contrast the various class and subtype of t cell in term of activation and function 
explain the mechanism by which superantigen effect unregulated t - cell activation as explain in overview of specific adaptive immunity , the antibody involve in humoral immunity often bind pathogen and toxin before - pron - can attach to and invade host cell .
thus , humoral immunity be primarily concern with fight pathogen in extracellular space .
however , pathogen that have already gain entry to host cell be largely protect from the humoral antibody - mediate defense .
cellular immunity , on the other hand , target and eliminate intracellular pathogen through the action of t lymphocyte , or t cell ( figure one  eight  .  one  three ) .
t cell also play a more central role in orchestrate the overall adaptive immune response ( humoral as well as cellular ) along with the cellular defense of innate immunity .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses
seven  eight  nine figure one  eight  .  one  three
this scan electron micrograph show a t lymphocyte , which be responsible for the cell - mediate immune response .
the spike - like membrane structure increase surface area , allow for great interaction with other cell type and - pron - signal .
( credit  modification of work by nci )
t cell production and maturation t cell , like all other white blood cell involve in innate and adaptive immunity , be form from multipotent hematopoietic stem cell ( hsc ) in the bone marrow ( see figure one  seven  .  one  two ) .
however , unlike the white blood cell of innate immunity , eventual t cell differentiate first into lymphoid stem cell that then become small , immature lymphocyte , sometimes call lymphoblast .
the first step of differentiation occur in the red marrow of bone ( figure one  eight  .  one  four ) , after which immature t lymphocyte enter the bloodstream and travel to the thymus for the final step of maturation ( figure one  eight  .  one  five ) .
once in the thymus , the immature t lymphocyte be refer to as thymocyte .
the maturation of thymocyte within the thymus can be divide into tree critical step of positive and negative selection , collectively refer to as thymic selection .
the first step of thymic selection occur in the cortex of the thymus and involve the development of a functional t - cell receptor ( tcr ) that be require for activation by apc .
thymocyte with defective tcr be remove by negative selection through the induction of apoptosis ( program control cell death ) .
the second step of thymic selection also occur in the cortex and involve the positive selection of thymocyte that will interact appropriately with mhc molecule .
thymocyte that can interact appropriately with mhc molecule receive a positive stimulation that move - pron - further through the process of maturation , whereas thymocyte that do not interact appropriately be not stimulate and be eliminate by apoptosis .
the third and final step of thymic selection occur in both the cortex and medulla and involve negative selection to remove selfreacte thymocyte , those that react to self - antigen , by apoptosis .
this final step be sometimes refer to as central tolerance because - pron - prevent self - react t cell from reach the bloodstream and potentially cause autoimmune disease , which occur when the immune system attack healthy " self " cell .
despite central tolerance , some self - reactive t cell generally escape the thymus and enter the peripheral bloodstream .
therefore , a second line of defense call peripheral tolerance be need to protect against autoimmune disease .
peripheral tolerance involve mechanism of anergy and inhibition of self - reactive t cell by regulatory t cell .
anergy refer to a state of nonresponsiveness to antigen stimulation .
in the case of self - reactive t cell that escape the thymus , lack of an essential co - stimulatory signal require for activation cause anergy and prevent autoimmune activation .
regulatory t cell participate in peripheral tolerance by inhibit the activation and function of selfreactive t cell and by secrete anti - inflammatory cytokine .
- pron - be not completely understand what event specifically direct maturation of thymocyte into regulatory t cell .
current theory suggest the critical event may occur during the third step of thymic selection , when most self - seven  nine  zero chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five reactive t cell be eliminate .
regulatory t cell may receive a unique signal that be below the threshold require to target - pron - for negative selection and apoptosis .
consequently , these cell continue to mature and then exit the thymus , arm to inhibit the activation of self - reactive t cell .
- pron - have be estimate that the three step of thymic selection eliminate nine  eight % of thymocyte .
the remain two % that exit the thymus migrate through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to site of secondary lymphoid organ / tissue , such as the lymph node , spleen , and tonsil ( figure one  eight  .  one  five ) , where - pron - await activation through the presentation of specific antigen by apc .
until - pron - be activate , - pron - be know as mature naïve t cell .
figure one  eight  .  one  four ( a ) red bone marrow can be find in the head of the femur ( thighbone ) and be also present in the flat bone of the body , such as the ilium and the scapula .
( b ) red bone marrow be the site of production and differentiation of many formed element of blood , include erythrocyte , leukocyte , and platelet .
the yellow bone marrow be populate primarily with adipose cell .
figure one  eight  .  one  five
the thymus be a bi - lob , h - shape glandular organ that be locate just above the heart .
- pron - be surround by a fibrous capsule of connective tissue .
the darkly stain cortex and the light stain medulla of individual lobule be clearly visible in the light micrograph of the thymus of a newborn ( top right , lm × one  zero  zero ) .
( credit micrograph 
modification of micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense seven  nine  one

what anatomical site be involve in t cell production and maturation ?

what be the three step involve in thymic selection ?

why be central tolerance and peripheral tolerance important ?
what do - pron - prevent ?
class of t cells t cell can be categorize into three distinct class  helper t cell , regulatory t cell , and cytotoxic t cell .
these class be differentiate base on - pron - expression of certain surface molecule , - pron - mode of activation , and - pron - functional role in adaptive immunity ( table one  eight  .  one ) .
all t cell produce cluster of differentiation ( cd ) molecule , cell surface glycoprotein that can be use to identify and distinguish between the various type of white blood cell .
although t cell can produce a variety of cd molecule , cd four and cd eight be the two most important use for differentiation of the class .
helper t cell and regulatory t cell be characterize by the expression of cd four on - pron - surface , whereas cytotoxic t cell be characterize by the expression of cd eight .
class of t cell can also be distinguish by the specific mhc molecule and apc with which - pron - interact for activation .
helper t cell and regulatory t cell can only be activate by apc present antigen associate with mhc ii .
in contrast , cytotoxic t cell recognize antigen present in association with mhc i , either by apc or by nucleated cell infect with an intracellular pathogen .
the different class of t cell also play different functional role in the immune system .
helper t cell serve as the central orchestrator that help activate and direct function of humoral and cellular immunity .
in addition , helper t cell enhance the pathogen - kill function of macrophage and nk cell of innate immunity .
in contrast , the primary role of regulatory t cell be to prevent undesirable and potentially damaging immune response .
- pron - role in peripheral tolerance , for example , protect against autoimmune disorder , as discuss earlier .
finally , cytotoxic t cell be the primary effector cell for cellular immunity .
- pron - recognize and target cell that have be infect by intracellular pathogen , destroy infected cell along with the pathogen inside .
class of t cells class surface cd molecules activation functions orchestrate humoral and cellular immunity helper t cell cd four apc present antigen associate with mhc ii involve in the activation of macrophage and nk cell regulatory t cell cd four apc present antigen associate with mhc ii involve in peripheral tolerance and prevention of autoimmune response cytotoxic t cell cd eight apc or infect nucleated cell present antigen associate with mhc i destroy cell infect with intracellular pathogen table
one  eight  .  one seven  nine  two chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be the unique function of the three class of t cell ?

which t cell can be activate by antigen present by cell other than apc ?
t - cell receptors
for both helper t cell and cytotoxic t cell , activation be a complex process that require the interaction of multiple molecule and exposure to cytokine .
the t - cell receptor ( tcr ) be involve in the first step of pathogen epitope recognition during the activation process .
the tcr come from the same receptor family as the antibody igd and igm , the antigen receptor on the b cell membrane surface , and thus share common structural element .
similar to antibody , the tcr have a variable region and a constant region , and the variable region provide the antigen - bind site ( figure one  eight  .  one  six ) .
however , the structure of tcr be small and less complex than the immunoglobulin molecule ( figure one  eight  .  five ) .
whereas immunoglobulin have four peptide chain and y - shape structure , the tcr consist of just two peptide chain ( α and β chain ) , both of which span the cytoplasmic membrane of the t cell .
tcr be epitope - specific , and - pron - have be estimate that two  five million t cell with unique epitope - bind tcr be require to protect an individual against a wide range of microbial pathogen .
because the human genome only contain about two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero gene , - pron - know that each specific tcr can not be encode by - pron - own set of gene .
this raise the question of how such a vast population of t cell with million of specific tcr can be achieve .
the answer be a process call genetic rearrangement , which occur in the thymus during the first step of thymic selection .
the gene that code for the variable region of the tcr be divide into distinct gene segment call variable ( v ) , diversity ( d ) , and join ( j ) segment .
the gene segment associate with the α chain of the tcr consist seven  zero or more different vα segment and six  one different jα segment .
the gene segment associate with the β chain of the tcr consist of five  two different vβ segment , two different dβ segment , and one  three different jβ segment .
during the development of the functional tcr in the thymus , genetic rearrangement in a t cell bring together one vα segment and one jα segment to code for the variable region of the α chain .
similarly , genetic rearrangement bring one of the vβ segment together with one of the dβ segment and one of thetjβ segment to code for the variable region of the β chain .
all the possible combination of rearrangement between different segment of v , d , and j provide the genetic diversity require to produce million of tcr with unique epitope - specific variable region .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses seven  nine  three figure one  eight  .  one  six
a t - cell receptor span the cytoplasmic membrane and project variable binding region into the extracellular space to bind process antigen associate with mhc i or mhc ii molecule .

what be the similarity and difference between tcr and immunoglobulin ?

what process be use to provide million of unique tcr bind site ?
activation and differentiation of helper t cells helper t cell can only be activate by apc present process foreign epitope in association with mhc ii .
the first step in the activation process be tcr recognition of the specific foreign epitope present within the mhc ii antigen - binding cleft .
the second step involve the interaction of cd four on the helper t cell with a region of the mhc ii molecule separate from the antigen - binding cleft .
this second interaction anchor the mhc ii - tcr complex and ensure that the helper t cell be recognize both the foreign ( " nonself " ) epitope and “ self " antigen of the apc  both recognition be require for activation of the cell .
in the third step , the apc and t cell secrete cytokine that activate the helper t cell .
the activated helper t cell then proliferate , divide by mitosis to produce clonal naïve helper t cell that differentiate into subtype with different function
( figure one  eight  .  one  seven ) .
seven  nine  four chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  one  seven
this illustration depict the activation of a naïve ( unactivated ) helper t cell by an antigen - present cell and the subsequent proliferation and differentiation of the activate t cell into different subtype .
activate helper t cell can differentiate into one of four distinct subtype , summarize in table one  eight  .  two .
the differentiation process be direct by apc - secrete cytokine .
depend on which apc - secrete cytokine interact with an activated helper t cell , the cell may differentiate into a t helper one ( th one ) cell , a t helper two ( th two ) cell , or a memory helper t cell .
the two type of helper t cell be relatively short - live effector cell , mean that - pron - perform various function of the immediate immune response .
in contrast , memory helper t cell be relatively long live  - pron - be program to " remember " a specific antigen or epitope in order to mount a rapid , strong , secondary response to subsequent exposure .
th one cell secrete - pron - own cytokine that be involve in stimulate and orchestrate other cell involve in adaptive and innate immunity .
for example , - pron - stimulate cytotoxic t cell , enhance - pron - killing of infected cell and promote differentiation into memory cytotoxic t cell .
th one cell also stimulate macrophage and neutrophil to become more effective in - pron - killing of intracellular bacteria .
- pron - can also stimulate nk cell to become more effective at kill target cell .
th two cell play an important role in orchestrate the humoral immune response through - pron - secretion of cytokine that activate b cell and direct b cell differentiation and antibody production .
various cytokine produce by th two cell orchestrate antibody class switching , which allow b cell to switch between the production of igm , igg , iga , and ige as need to carry out specific antibody function and to provide pathogen - specific humoral immune response .
a third subtype of helper t cell call th one  seven cell be discover through observation that immunity to some infection be not associate with th one or th two cell .
th one  seven cell and the cytokine - pron - produce appear to be specifically responsible for the body 's defense against chronic mucocutaneous infection .
patient who lack sufficient th one  seven cell in the mucosa ( e . g . , hiv patient ) may be more susceptible to bacteremia and gastrointestinal infections . [ one
] one .
blaschitz c . , raffatellu m . “ th one  seven cytokine and the gut mucosal barrier .
”
j clin immunol .
two  zero  one  zero mar  three  zero  (  two  )  one  nine  six - two  zero  three .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  zero  zero  seven  / s one  zero  eight  seven  five - zero  one  zero - nine  three  six  eight - seven .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses
seven  nine  five subtypes of helper t cells subtype functions stimulate cytotoxic t cell and produce memory cytotoxic t cell stimulate macrophage and neutrophil ( pmn ) for more effective intracellular killing of pathogen th one cell stimulate nk cell to kill more effectively th two cell stimulate b cell activation and differentiation into plasma cell and memory b cell direct antibody class switching in b cell th one  seven cell
stimulate immunity to specific infection such as chronic mucocutaneous infection memory helper t cell
“ remember " a specific pathogen and mount a strong , rapid secondary response upon reexposure table one  eight  .  two activation and differentiation of cytotoxic t cell cytotoxic t cell ( also refer to as cytotoxic t lymphocyte , or ctl ) be activate by apc in a three - step process similar to that of helper t cell .
the key difference be that the activation of cytotoxic t cell involve recognition of an antigen present with mhc i ( as oppose to mhc ii ) and interaction of cd eight ( as oppose to cd four ) with the receptor complex .
after the successful co - recognition of foreign epitope and self - antigen , the production of cytokine by the apc and the cytotoxic t cell activate clonal proliferation and differentiation .
activate cytotoxic t cell can differentiate into effector cytotoxic t cell that target pathogen for destruction or memory cell that be ready to respond to subsequent exposure .
as note , proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic t cell be also stimulate by cytokine secrete from th one cell activate by the same foreign epitope .
the co - stimulation that come from these th one cell be provide by secrete cytokine .
although - pron - be possible for activation of cytotoxic t cell to occur without stimulation from th one cell , the activation be not as effective or long - last .
once activate , cytotoxic t cell serve as the effector cell of cellular immunity , recognize and kill cell infect with intracellular pathogen through a mechanism very similar to that of nk cell .
however , whereas nk cell recognize nonspecific signal of cell stress or abnormality , cytotoxic t cell recognize infected cell through antigen presentation of pathogen - specific epitope associate with mhc i . once an infected cell be recognize , the tcr of the cytotoxic t cell bind to the epitope and release perforin and granzyme that destroy the infect cell ( figure one  eight  .  one  eight ) .
perforin be a protein that create pore in the target cell , and granzyme be protease that enter the pore and induce apoptosis .
this mechanism of program cell death be a control and efficient mean of destroy and remove infected cell without release the pathogen inside to infect neighboring cell , as may occur if the infect cell be simply lyse .
seven  nine  six chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  one  eight
this figure illustrate the activation of a naïve ( unactivated ) cytotoxic t cell ( ctl ) by an antigenpresenting mhc i molecule on an infected body cell .
once activate , the ctl release perforin and granzyme that invade the infected cell and induce control cell death , or apoptosis .
in this video ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two cytotcellapop ) , - pron - can see a cytotoxic t cell induce apoptosis in a target cell .

compare and contrast the activation of helper t cell and cytotoxic t cell .

what be the different function of helper t cell subtype ?

what be the mechanism of ctl - mediate destruction of infected cell ?
superantigen and unregulated activation of t cell
when t cell activation be control and regulate , the result be a protective response that be effective in combat infection .
however , if t cell activation be unregulated and excessive , the result can be a life - threaten .
certain bacterial and viral pathogen produce toxin know as superantigen ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) that can trigger such an unregulated response .
know bacterial superantigen include toxic shock syndrome toxin ( tsst ) , staphylococcal enterotoxin , streptococcal pyrogenic toxin , streptococcal superantigen , and the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin .
virus know to produce superantigen include epstein - barr virus ( human herpesvirus four ) , cytomegalovirus ( human herpesvirus five ) , and other .
link to learning chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense seven  nine  seven
the mechanism of t cell activation by superantigen involve - pron - simultaneous bind to mhc ii molecule of apc and the variable region of the tcr β chain .
this bind occur outside of the antigen - binding cleft of mhc ii , so the superantigen will bridge together and activate mhc ii and tcr without specific foreign epitope recognition ( figure one  eight  .  one  nine ) .
the result be an excessive , uncontrolled release of cytokine , often call a cytokine storm , which stimulate an excessive inflammatory response .
this can lead to a dangerous decrease in blood pressure , shock , multiorgan failure , and potentially , death .
figure one  eight  .  one  nine ( a )
the macrophage in this figure be present a foreign epitope that do not match the tcr of the t cell .
because the t cell do not recognize the epitope , - pron - be not activate .
( b )
the macrophage in this figure be present a superantigen that be not recognize by the tcr of the t cell , yet the superantigen still be able to bridge and bind the mhc ii and tcr molecule .
this nonspecific , uncontrolled activation of the t cell result in an excessive release of cytokine that activate other t cell and cause excessive inflammation .
( credit  modification of work by “ microbiotic” / youtube )

what be example of superantigen ?

how do a superantigen activate a helper t cell ?

what effect do a superantigen have on a t cell ?
superantigens melissa , an otherwise healthy two  two  - year - old woman , be bring to the emergency room by - pron - concerned boyfriend .
- pron - complain of a sudden onset of high fever , vomiting , diarrhea , and muscle ache .
in - pron - initial interview , - pron - tell the attend physician that - pron - be on hormonal birth control and also be two day into the menstruation portion of - pron - cycle .
- pron - be on no other medication and be not abuse any drug or alcohol .
- pron - be not a smoker .
- pron - be not diabetic and do not currently have an infection of any kind to - pron - knowledge .
while wait in the emergency room , melissa 's blood pressure begin to drop dramatically and - pron - mental state deteriorate to general confusion .
the physician believe - pron - be likely suffer from toxic shock syndrome ( tss ) .
tss be cause by the toxin tsst -  one , a superantigen associate with staphylococcus aureus , case in point seven  nine  eight chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and improper tampon use be a common cause of infection lead to tss .
the superantigen inappropriately stimulate widespread t cell activation and excessive cytokine release , result in a massive and systemic inflammatory response that can be fatal .
vaginal or cervical swab may be take to confirm the presence of the microbe , but these test be not critical to perform base on melissa 's symptom and medical history .
the physician prescribe rehydration , supportive therapy , and antibiotic to stem the bacterial infection .
- pron - also prescribe drug to increase melissa 's blood pressure .
melissa spend three day in the hospital undergo treatment  in addition , - pron - kidney function be monitor because of the high risk of kidney failure associate with tss .
after seven  two hour , melissa be well enough to be discharge to continue - pron - recovery at home .

in what way would antibiotic therapy help to combat a superantigen ?
part two olivia 's swollen lymph node , abdoman , and spleen suggest a strong immune response to a systemic infection in progress .
in addition , little olivia be reluctant to turn - pron - head and appear to be experience severe neck pain .
the physician order a complete blood count , blood culture , and lumbar puncture .
the cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) obtain appear cloudy and be further evaluate by gram stain assessment and culture for potential bacterial pathogen .
the complete blood count indicate elevated number of white blood cell in olivia 's bloodstream .
the white blood cell increase be record at two  eight  .  five k / μl ( normal range  six  .  zero – one  seven  .  five k / μl ) .
the neutrophil percentage be record as six  zero % ( normal range  two  three – four  five % ) .
glucose level in the csf be register at three  zero mg /  one  zero  zero ml ( normal range  five  zero – eight  zero mg /  one  zero  zero ml ) .
the wbc count in the csf be one  ,  one  six  three  / mm three ( normal range  five – two  zero  / mm three ) .

base on these result , do - pron - have a preliminary diagnosis ?

what be a recommend treatment base on this preliminary diagnosis ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  eight  .  four b lymphocytes and humoral immunity learning objectives
 describe the production and maturation of b cell
 compare the structure of b - cell receptor and t - cell receptor 
compare t - dependent and t - independent activation of b cell  compare
the primary and secondary antibody response humoral immunity refer to mechanism of the adaptive immune defense that be mediate by antibody secrete by b lymphocyte , or b cell .
this section will focus on b cell and discuss - pron - production and maturation , receptor , and mechanism of activation .
b cell production and maturation like t cell , b cell be form from multipotent hematopoietic stem cell ( hsc ) in the bone marrow and follow a pathway through lymphoid stem cell and lymphoblast ( see figure one  seven  .  one  two ) .
unlike t cell , however , lymphoblast clinical focus chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense seven  nine  nine destine to become b cell do not leave the bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation .
rather , eventual b cell continue to mature in the bone marrow .
the first step of b cell maturation be an assessment of the functionality of - pron - antigen - binding receptor .
this occur through positive selection for b cell with normal functional receptor .
a mechanism of negative selection be then use to eliminate self - react b cell and minimize the risk of autoimmunity .
negative selection of self - react b cell can involve elimination by apoptosis , editing or modification of the receptor so - pron - be no longer self - reactive , or induction of anergy in the b cell .
immature b cell that pass the selection in the bone marrow then travel to the spleen for - pron - final stage of maturation .
there - pron - become naïve mature b cell , i . e . , mature b cell that have not yet be activate .

compare the maturation of b cell with the maturation of t cell .
b - cell receptors like t cell
, b cell possess antigen - specific receptor with diverse specificity .
although - pron - rely on t cell for optimum function , b cell can be activate without help from t cell .
b - cell receptor ( bcr ) for naïve mature b cell be membrane - bind monomeric form of igd and igm .
- pron - have two identical heavy chain and two identical light chain connect by disulfide bond into a basic “ y " shape ( figure one  eight  .  two  zero ) .
the trunk of the y - shape molecule , the constant region of the two heavy chain , span the b cell membrane .
the two antigen - bind site expose to the exterior of the b cell be involve in the binding of specific pathogen epitope to initiate the activation process .
- pron - be estimate that each naïve mature b cell have upward of one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero bcr on - pron - membrane , and each of these bcr have an identical epitope - bind specificity .
in order to be prepared to react to a wide range of microbial epitope , b cell , like t cell , use genetic rearrangement of hundred of gene segment to provide the necessary diversity of receptor specificity .
the variable region of the bcr heavy chain be make up of v , d , and j segment , similar to the β chain of the tcr .
the variable region of the bcr light chain be make up of v and j segment , similar to the α chain of the tcr .
genetic rearrangement of all possible combination of v - j - d ( heavy chain ) and v - j ( light chain ) provide for million of unique antigen - bind site for the bcr and for the antibody secrete after activation .
one important difference between bcr and tcr be the way - pron - can interact with antigenic epitope .
whereas tcr can only interact with antigenic epitope that be present within the antigen - binding cleft of mhc i or mhc ii , bcr do not require antigen presentation with mhc  - pron - can interact with epitope on free antigen or with epitope display on the surface of intact pathogen .
another important difference be that tcr only recognize protein epitope , whereas bcr can recognize epitope associate with different molecular class ( e . g . , protein , polysaccharide , lipopolysaccharide ) .
activation of b cell occur through different mechanism depend on the molecular class of the antigen .
activation of a b cell by a protein antigen require the b cell to function as an apc , present the protein epitope with mhc ii to helper t cell .
because of - pron - dependence on t cell for activation of b cell , protein antigen be classify as tdependent antigen .
in contrast , polysaccharide , lipopolysaccharide , and other nonprotein antigen be consider t - independent antigen because - pron - can activate b cell without antigen processing and presentation to t cell .
eight  zero  zero chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  two  zero b - cell receptor be embed in the membrane of b cell .
the variable region of all of the receptor on a single cell bind the same specific antigen .

what type of molecule serve as the bcr ?

what be the difference between tcr and bcr with respect to antigen recognition ?

which molecule class be t - dependent antigen and which be t - independent antigen ?
t cell - independent activation of b cell activation of b cell without the cooperation of helper t cell be refer to as t cell - independent activation and occur when bcr interact with t - independent antigen .
t - independent antigen ( e . g . , polysaccharide capsule , lipopolysaccharide ) have repetitive epitope unit within - pron - structure , and this repetition allow for the cross - linkage of multiple bcr , provide the first signal for activation ( figure one  eight  .  two  one ) .
because t cell be not involve , the second signal have to come from other source , such as interaction of toll - like receptor with pamp or interaction with factor from the complement system .
once a b cell be activate , - pron - undergo clonal proliferation and daughter cell differentiate into plasma cell .
plasma cell be antibody factory that secrete large quantity of antibody .
after differentiation , the surface bcr disappear and the plasma cell secrete pentameric igm molecule that have the same antigen specificity as the bcr ( figure one  eight  .  two  one ) .
the t cell - independent response be short - lived and do not result in the production of memory b cell .
thus - pron - will not result in a secondary response to subsequent exposure to t - independent antigen .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses
eight  zero  one figure one  eight  .  two  one t - independent antigen have repeat epitope that can induce b cell recognition and activation without involvement from t cell .
a second signal , such as interaction of tlr with pamp ( not show ) , be also require for activation of the b cell .
once activate , the b cell proliferate and differentiate into antibody - secrete plasma cell .

what be the two signal require for t cell - independent activation of b cell ?

what be the function of a plasma cell ?
t cell - dependent activation of b cell t cell - dependent activation of b cell be more complex than t cell - independent activation , but the result immune response be strong and develop memory .
t cell - dependent activation can occur either in response to free protein antigen or to protein antigen associate with an intact pathogen .
interaction between the bcr on a naïve mature b cell and a free protein antigen stimulate internalization of the antigen , whereas interaction with antigen associate with an intact pathogen initiate the extraction of the antigen from the pathogen before internalization .
once internalize inside the b cell , the protein antigen be process and present with mhc ii .
the presented antigen be then recognize by helper t cell specific to the same antigen .
the tcr of the helper t cell recognize the foreign antigen , and the t cell 's cd four molecule interact with mhc ii on the b cell .
the coordination between b cell and helper t cell that be specific to the same antigen be refer to as link recognition .
once activate by linked recognition , th two cell produce and secrete cytokine that activate the b cell and cause proliferation into clonal daughter cell .
after several round of proliferation , additional cytokine provide by the th two cell stimulate the differentiation of activated b cell clone into memory b cell , which will quickly respond to subsequent exposure to the same protein epitope , and plasma cell that lose - pron - membrane bcr and initially secrete pentameric igm ( figure one  eight  .  two  two ) .
after initial secretion of igm , cytokine secrete by th two cell stimulate the plasma cell to switch from igm production to production of igg , iga , or ige .
this process , call class switching or isotype switching , allow plasma cell clone from the same activate b cell to produce a variety of antibody class with the same epitope specificity .
class switching be accomplish by genetic rearrangement of gene segment encode the constant region , which determine an antibody 's class .
the variable region be not change , so the new class of antibody retain the original epitope specificity .
eight  zero  two chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  two  two
in t cell - dependent activation of b cell , the b cell recognize and internalize an antigen and present - pron - to a helper t cell that be specific to the same antigen .
the helper t cell interact with the antigen present by the b cell , which activate the t cell and stimulate the release of cytokine that then activate the b cell .
activation of the b cell trigger proliferation and differentiation into b cell and plasma cell .

what step be require for t cell - dependent activation of b cell ?

what be antibody class switching and why be - pron - important ?
primary and secondary responses t cell - dependent activation of b cell play an important role in both the primary and secondary response associate with adaptive immunity .
with the first exposure to a protein antigen , a t cell - dependent primary antibody response occur .
the initial stage of the primary response be a lag period , or latent period , of approximately one  zero day , during which no antibody can be detect in serum .
this lag period be the time require for all of the step of the primary chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defenses eight  zero  three response , include naïve mature b cell bind of antigen with bcr , antigen processing and presentation , helper t cell activation , b cell activation , and clonal proliferation .
the end of the lag period be characterize by a rise in igm level in the serum , as th two cell stimulate b cell differentiation into plasma cell .
igm level reach - pron - peak around one  four day after primary antigen exposure  at about this same time , th two stimulate antibody class switching , and igm level in serum begin to decline .
meanwhile , level of igg increase until - pron - reach a peak about three week into the primary response ( figure one  eight  .  two  three ) .
during the primary response , some of the clone b cell be differentiate into memory b cell program to respond to subsequent exposure .
this secondary response occur more quickly and forcefully than the primary response .
the lag period be decrease to only a few day and the production of igg be significantly high than observe for the primary response ( figure one  eight  .  two  three ) .
in addition , the antibody produce during the secondary response be more effective and bind with high affinity to the targeted epitope .
plasma cell produce during secondary response live longer than those produce during the primary response , so level of specific antibody remain elevated for a long period of time .
figure one  eight  .  two  three
compare to the primary response , the secondary antibody response occur more quickly and produce antibody level that be high and more sustained .
the secondary response mostly involve igg . 
what event occur during the lag period of the primary antibody response ?

why do antibody level remain elevated longer during the secondary antibody response ?
one  eight  .  five
vaccines learning objectives

compare the various kind of artificial immunity 
differentiate between variolation and vaccination  describe different type of vaccine and explain - pron - respective advantage and disadvantage for many disease , prevention be the good form of treatment , and few strategy for disease prevention be as effective eight  zero  four chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five as vaccination .
vaccination be a form of artificial immunity .
by artificially stimulate the adaptive immune defense , a vaccine trigger memory cell production similar to that which would occur during a primary response .
in so do , the patient be able to mount a strong secondary response upon exposure to the pathogen - but without have to first suffer through an initial infection .
in this section , - pron - will explore several different kind of artificial immunity along with various type of vaccine and the mechanism by which - pron - induce artificial immunity .
classification of adaptive immunity
all form of adaptive immunity can be describe as either active or passive .
active immunity refer to the activation of an individual 's own adaptive immune defense , whereas passive immunity refer to the transfer of adaptive immune defense from another individual or animal .
active and passive immunity can be further subdivide base on whether the protection be acquire naturally or artificially .
natural active immunity be adaptive immunity that develop after natural exposure to a pathogen ( figure one  eight  .  two  four ) .
example would include the lifelong immunity that develop after recovery from a chickenpox or measle infection ( although an acute infection be not always necessary to activate adaptive immunity ) .
the length of time that an individual be protect can vary substantially depend upon the pathogen and antigen involve .
for example , activation of adaptive immunity by protein spike structure during an intracellular viral infection can activate lifelong immunity , whereas activation by carbohydrate capsule antigen during an extracellular bacterial infection may activate short - term immunity .
natural passive immunity involve the natural passage of antibody from a mother to - pron - child before and after birth .
igg be the only antibody class that can cross the placenta from mother 's blood to the fetal blood supply .
placental transfer of igg be an important passive immune defense for the infant , last up to six month after birth .
secretory iga can also be transfer from mother to infant through breast milk .
artificial passive immunity refer to the transfer of antibody produce by a donor ( human or animal ) to another individual .
this transfer of antibody may be do as a prophylactic measure ( i . e . , to prevent disease after exposure to a pathogen ) or as a strategy for treat an active infection .
for example , artificial passive immunity be commonly use for post - exposure prophylaxis against rabie , hepatitis a , hepatitis b , and chickenpox ( in high risk individual ) .
active infection treat by artificial passive immunity include cytomegalovirus infection in immunocompromised patient and ebola virus infection .
in one  nine  nine  five , eight patient in the democratic republic of the congo with active ebola infection be treat with blood transfusion from patient who be recover from ebola .
only one of the eight patient die ( a one  two  .  five % mortality rate ) , which be much low than the expect eight  zero % mortality rate for ebola in untreated patients . [ two ]
artificial passive immunity be also use for the treatment of disease cause by bacterial toxin , include tetanus , botulism , and diphtheria .
artificial active immunity be the foundation for vaccination .
- pron - involve the activation of adaptive immunity through the deliberate exposure of an individual to weakened or inactivate pathogen , or preparation consist of key pathogen antigen .
two .
k . mupapa , m . massamba , k . kibadi , k . kivula , a . bwaka , m . kipasa , r . colebunders , j . j . muyembe - tamfum .
“
treatment of ebola hemorrhagic fever with blood transfusions from convalescent patients .
" journal of infectious diseases one  seven  nine suppl .
( one  nine  nine  nine )  s one  eight –s two  three .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses
eight  zero  five figure one  eight  .  two  four
the four classification of immunity .
( credit top left photo  modification of work by usda  credit top right photo  modification of work by “ michaelberry” / wikimedia  credit bottom leave photo  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit bottom right photo  modification of work by friskila silitonga , indonesia , centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the difference between active and passive immunity ?

what kind of immunity be confer by a vaccine ?
herd immunity
the four kind of immunity just describe result from an individual 's adaptive immune system .
for any give disease , an individual may be consider immune or susceptible depend on - pron - or - pron - ability to mount an effective immune response upon exposure .
thus , any give population be likely to have some individual who be immune and other individual who be susceptible .
if a population have very few susceptible individual , even those susceptible individual will be protect by a phenomenon call herd immunity .
herd immunity have nothing to do with an individual 's ability to mount an effective immune response  rather , - pron - occur because there be too few susceptible individual in a population for the disease to spread effectively .
vaccination program create herd immunity by greatly reduce the number of susceptible individual in a population .
even if some individual in the population be not vaccinate , as long as a certain percentage be immune ( either naturally or artificially ) , the few susceptible individual be unlikely to be expose to the pathogen .
however , because new individual be constantly enter population ( for example , through birth or relocation ) , vaccination program be necessary to maintain herd immunity .
eight  zero  six chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five vaccination 
obligation or choice a grow number of parent be choose not to vaccinate - pron - child .
- pron - be dub “ antivaxxer , " and the majority of - pron - believe that vaccine be a cause of autism ( or other disease condition ) , a link that have now be thoroughly disproven .
other object to vaccine on religious or moral ground ( e . g . , the argument that gardasil vaccination against hpv may promote sexual promiscuity ) , on personal ethical ground ( e . g . , a conscientious objection to any medical intervention ) , or on political ground ( e . g . , the notion that mandatory vaccination be a violation of individual liberties ) . [ three ]
- pron - be believe that this grow number of unvaccinated individual have lead to new outbreak of whooping cough and measle .
- pron - would expect that herd immunity would protect those unvaccinated in - pron - population , but herd immunity can only be maintain if enough individual be be vaccinate .
vaccination be clearly beneficial for public health .
but from the individual parent 's perspective the view can be murky .
vaccine , like all medical intervention , have associate risk , and while the risk of vaccination may be extremely low compare to the risk of infection , parent may not always understand or accept the consensus of the medical community .
do such parent have a right to withhold vaccination from - pron - child ?
should - pron - be allow to put - pron - child - and society at large - at risk ?
many government insist on childhood vaccination as a condition for enter public school , but - pron - have become easy in most state to opt out of the requirement or to keep child out of the public system .
since the one  nine  seven  zero , west virginia and mississippi have have in place a stringent requirement for childhood vaccination , without exception , and neither state have have a case of measle since the early one  nine  nine  zero .
california lawmaker recently pass a similar law in response to a measle outbreak in two  zero  one  five , make - pron - much more difficult for parent to opt out of vaccine if - pron - child be attend public school .
give this track record and renew legislative effort , should other state adopt similarly strict requirement ?
what role should health - care provider play in promote or enforce universal vaccination ?
study have show that many parent ' mind can be change in response to information deliver by health - care worker , but be - pron - the place of health - care worker to try to persuade parent to have - pron - child vaccinate ?
some health - care provider be understandably reluctant to treat unvaccinated patient .
do - pron - have the right to refuse service to patient who decline vaccine ?
do insurance company have the right to deny coverage to antivaxxer ?
these be all ethical question that policymaker may be force to address as more parent skirt vaccination norm .
variolation and vaccination thousands of year ago , - pron - be first recognize that individual who survive a smallpox infection be immune to subsequent infection .
the practice of inoculate individual to actively protect - pron - from smallpox appear to have originate in the one  zero th century in china , when the practice of variolation be describe ( figure one  eight  .  two  five ) .
variolation refer to the deliberate inoculation of individual with infectious material from scab or pustule of smallpox victim .
infectious material be either inject into the skin or introduce through the nasal route .
the infection that develop be usually mild than naturally acquire smallpox , and recovery from the milder infection provide protection against the more serious disease .
although the majority of individual treat by variolation develop only mild infection , the practice be not without risk .
more serious and sometimes fatal infection do occur , and because smallpox be contagious , eye on ethics three .
elizabeth yale .
“
why anti - vaccination movements can never be tame .
” religion and politics , july two  two , two  zero  one  four .
http / / religionandpolitics . org /  two  zero  one  four  /  zero  seven  /  two  two  / why - anti - vaccination - movements - can - never - be - tame .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses
eight  zero  seven infection result from variolation could lead to epidemic .
even so , the practice of variolation for smallpox prevention spread to other region , include india , africa , and europe .
figure one  eight  .  two  five variolation for smallpox originate in the far east and the practice later spread to europe and africa .
this japanese relief depict a patient receive a smallpox variolation from the physician ogata shunsaku ( one  seven  four  eight – one  eight  one  zero ) .
although variolation have be practice for century , the english physician edward jenner ( one  seven  four  nine – one  eight  two  three ) be generally credit with develop the modern process of vaccination .
jenner observe that milkmaid who develop cowpox , a disease similar to smallpox but milder , be immune to the more serious smallpox .
this lead jenner to hypothesize that exposure to a less virulent pathogen could provide immune protection against a more virulent pathogen , provide a safe alternative to variolation .
in one  seven  nine  six , jenner test - pron - hypothesis by obtain infectious sample from a milkmaid 's active cowpox lesion and inject the material into a young boy ( figure one  eight  .  two  six ) .
the boy develop a mild infection that include a low - grade fever , discomfort in - pron - axillae ( armpit ) and loss of appetite .
when the boy be later infect with infectious sample from smallpox lesion , - pron - do not contract smallpox . [ four ]
this new approach be term vaccination , a name derive from the use of cowpox ( latin vacca mean “ cow " ) to protect against smallpox .
today , - pron - know that jenner 's vaccine work because the cowpox virus be genetically and antigenically relate to the variola virus that cause smallpox .
exposure to cowpox antigen result in a primary response and the production of memory cell that identical or related epitope of variola virus upon a later exposure to smallpox .
the success of jenner 's smallpox vaccination lead other scientist to develop vaccine for other disease .
perhaps the most notable be louis pasteur , who develop vaccine for rabie , cholera , and anthrax .
during the two  zero th and two  one st century , effective vaccine be develop to prevent a wide range of disease cause by virus ( e . g . , chickenpox and shingle , hepatitis , measle , mump , polio , and yellow fever ) and bacteria ( e . g . , diphtheria , pneumococcal pneumonia , tetanus , and whooping cough , ) .
four .
n . j . willis .
“
edward jenner and the eradication of smallpox .
" scottish medical journal four  two ( one  nine  nine  seven ) 
one  one  eight – one  two  one . eight  zero  eight chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  eight  .  two  six ( a ) a painting of edward jenner depict a cow and a milkmaid in the background .
( b ) lesion on a patient infect with cowpox , a zoonotic disease cause by a virus closely relate to the one that cause smallpox .
( credit b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the difference between variolation and vaccination for smallpox ?

explain why vaccination be less risky than variolation .
class of vaccines for a vaccine to provide protection against a disease , - pron - must expose an individual to pathogen - specific antigen that will stimulate a protective adaptive immune response .
by - pron - very nature , this entail some risk .
as with any pharmaceutical drug , vaccine have the potential to cause adverse effect .
however , the ideal vaccine cause no severe adverse effect and pose no risk of contract the disease that - pron - be intend to prevent .
various type of vaccine have be develop with these goal in mind .
these different class of vaccine be describe in the next section and summarize in table one  eight  .  three .
live attenuated vaccines live attenuate vaccine expose an individual to a weakened strain of a pathogen with the goal of establish a subclinical infection that will activate the adaptive immune defense .
pathogen be attenuate to decrease - pron - virulence use method such as genetic manipulation ( to eliminate key virulence factor ) or long - term culturing in an unnatural host or environment ( to promote mutation and decrease virulence ) .
by establish an active infection , live attenuated vaccine stimulate a more comprehensive immune response than some other type of vaccine .
live attenuated vaccine activate both cellular and humoral immunity and stimulate the development of memory for long - last immunity .
in some case , vaccination of one individual with a live attenuated pathogen can even lead to natural transmission of the attenuated pathogen to other individual .
this can cause the other individual to also develop an active , subclinical infection that activate - pron - adaptive immune defense .
disadvantage associate with live attenuated vaccine include the challenge associate with long - term storage and transport as well as the potential for a patient to develop sign and symptom of disease during the active infection ( particularly in immunocompromised patient ) .
there be also a risk of the attenuated pathogen revert back to full virulence .
table one  eight  .  three list example live attenuate vaccine .
chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses eight  zero  nine
inactivated vaccines inactivate vaccine contain whole pathogen that have be kill or inactivate with heat , chemical , or radiation .
for inactivate vaccine to be effective , the inactivation process must not affect the structure of key antigen on the pathogen .
because the pathogen be kill or inactive , inactivate vaccine do not produce an active infection , and the result immune response be weak and less comprehensive than that provoke by a live attenuate vaccine .
typically the response involve only humoral immunity , and the pathogen can not be transmit to other individual .
in addition , inactivate vaccine usually require high dos and multiple booster , possibly cause inflammatory reaction at the site of injection .
despite these disadvantage , inactivated vaccine do have the advantage of long - term storage stability and ease of transport .
also , there be no risk of cause severe active infection .
however , inactivated vaccine be not without - pron - side effect .
table one  eight  .  three list example of inactivate vaccine .
subunit vaccines whereas live attenuated and inactive vaccine expose an individual to a weakened or dead pathogen , subunit vaccine only expose the patient to the key antigen of a pathogen - not whole cell or virus .
subunit vaccine can be produce either by chemically degrade a pathogen and isolate - pron - key antigen or by produce the antigen through genetic engineering .
because these vaccine contain only the essential antigen of a pathogen , the risk of side effect be relatively low .
table one  eight  .  three list example of subunit vaccine .
toxoid vaccines like subunit vaccine , toxoid vaccine do not introduce a whole pathogen to the patient  - pron - contain inactivate bacterial toxin , call toxoid .
toxoid vaccine be use to prevent disease in which bacterial toxin play an important role in pathogenesis .
these vaccine activate humoral immunity that neutralize the toxin .
table one  eight  .  three list example of toxoid vaccine .
conjugate vaccines a conjugate vaccine be a type of subunit vaccine that consist of a protein conjugate to a capsule polysaccharide .
conjugate vaccine have be develop to enhance the efficacy of subunit vaccine against pathogen that have protective polysaccharide capsule that help - pron - evade phagocytosis , cause invasive infection that can lead to meningitis and other serious condition .
the subunit vaccine against these pathogen introduce t - independent capsular polysaccharide antigen that result in the production of antibody that can opsonize the capsule and thus combat the infection  however , child under the age of two year do not respond effectively to these vaccine .
child do respond effectively when vaccinate with the conjugate vaccine , in which a protein with t - dependent antigen be conjugate to the capsule polysaccharide .
the conjugate protein - polysaccharide antigen stimulate production of antibody against both the protein and the capsule polysaccharide .
table one  eight  .  three list example of conjugate vaccine .
class of vaccines class description advantage disadvantage examples cellular and humoral immunity difficult to store and transport
live attenuate weakened strain of whole pathogen long - last immunity risk of infection in immunocompromised patient chickenpox , german measle , measle , mump , tuberculosis , typhoid fever , yellow fever table one  eight  .  three eight  one  zero chapter one  eight  adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five class of vaccines class description advantage disadvantages examples transmission to contact risk of reversion ease of storage and transport
weaker immunity ( humoral only ) inactivate whole pathogen kill or inactivate with heat , chemical , or radiation
no risk of severe active infection
higher dose and more booster require
cholera , hepatitis a , influenza , plague , rabie limited longevity multiple dose require subunit immunogenic antigen low risk of side effect
no protection against antigenic variation anthrax , hepatitis b , influenza , meningitis , papillomavirus , pneumococcal pneumonia
, whooping cough toxoid inactivated bacterial toxin humoral immunity to neutralize toxin do not prevent infection botulism , diphtheria , pertussis , tetanus t - dependent costly to produce response to capsule no protection against antigenic variation conjugate capsule polysaccharide conjugate to protein
well response in young child may interfere with other vaccine meningitis ( haemophilus influenzae , streptococcus pneumoniae , neisseria meningitide ) table one  eight  .  three

what be the risk associate with a live attenuate vaccine ?

why be a conjugate vaccine necessary in some case ?
dna vaccines dna vaccine represent a relatively new and promising approach to vaccination .
a dna vaccine be produce by incorporate gene for antigen into a recombinant plasmid vaccine .
introduction of the dna vaccine into a patient lead to uptake of the recombinant plasmid by some of the patient 's cell , follow by transcription and translation of antigen and presentation of these antigen with mhc i to activate adaptive immunity .
this result in the stimulation of both humoral and cellular immunity without the risk of active disease associate with live attenuated vaccine .
micro connections chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses eight  one  one
although most dna vaccine for human be still in development , - pron - be likely that - pron - will become more prevalent in the near future as researcher be work on engineer dna vaccine that will activate adaptive immunity against several different pathogen at once .
first - generation dna vaccine test in the one  nine  nine  zero look promise in animal model but be disappointing when test in human subject .
poor cellular uptake of the dna plasmid be one of the major problem impact - pron - efficacy .
trial of second - generation dna vaccine have be more promising thank to new technique for enhance cellular uptake and optimize antigen .
dna vaccine for various cancer and viral pathogen such as hiv , hpv , and hepatitis b and c be currently in development .
some dna vaccine be already in use .
in two  zero  zero  five , a dna vaccine against west nile virus be approve for use in horse in the united states .
canada have also approve a dna vaccine to protect fish from infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus . [ five ]
a dna vaccine against japanese encephalitis virus be approve for use in human in two  zero  one  zero in australia . [ six ]
resolution base on olivia 's symptom , - pron - physician make a preliminary diagnosis of bacterial meningitis without wait for positive identification from the blood and csf sample send to the lab .
olivia be admit to the hospital and treat with intravenous broad - spectrum antibiotic and rehydration therapy .
over the next several day , - pron - condition begin to improve , and new blood sample and lumbar puncture sample show an absence of microbe in the blood and csf with level of white blood cell return to normal .
during this time , the lab produce a positive identification of neisseria meningitidis , the causative agent of meningococcal meningitis , in - pron - original csf sample .
n . meningitidis produce a polysaccharide capsule that serve as a virulence factor .
n . meningitidis tend to affect infant after - pron - begin to lose the natural passive immunity provide by maternal antibody .
at one year of age , olivia 's maternal igg antibody would have disappear , and - pron - would not have develop memory cell capable of recognize antigen associate with the polysaccharide capsule of the n . meningitidis .
as a result , - pron - adaptive immune system be unable to produce protective antibody to combat the infection , and without antibiotic - pron - may not have survive .
olivia 's infection likely would have be avoid altogether have - pron - be vaccinate .
a conjugate vaccine to prevent meningococcal meningitis be available and approve for infant as young as two month of age .
however , current vaccination schedule in the united states recommend that the vaccine be administer at age one  one – one  two with a booster at age one  six .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus five .
m . alonso and j . c . leong .
“
licensed dna vaccine against infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus ( ihnv ) .
" recent patents on dna and gene sequences
( discontinued ) seven
no . one ( two  zero  one  three )  six  two – six  five , issn one  eight  seven  two - two  one  five  six  /  two  two  one  two - three  four  three  one .
doi one  zero  .  two  one  seven  four  /  one  eight  seven  two  two  one  five  six  one  one  three  zero  seven  zero  one  zero  zero  zero  nine .
six .
s . b . halstead and s . j . thomas .
“
new japanese encephalitis vaccines  alternative to production in mouse brain .
” expert review of vaccines
one  zero no .
three ( two  zero  one  one )  three  five  five – six  four .
eight  one  two chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defense
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
in country with develop public health system , many vaccine be routinely administer to child and adult .
vaccine schedule be change periodically , base on new information and research result gather by public health agency .
in the united states , the cdc publish schedule and other update information ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two cdcvacsche ) about vaccine .
summary one  eight  .  one overview of specific adaptive immunity  adaptive immunity be an acquire defense against foreign pathogen that be characterize by specificity and memory .
the first exposure to an antigen stimulate a primary response , and subsequent exposure stimulate a fast and strong secondary response .
 adaptive immunity be a dual system involve humoral immunity ( antibody produce by b cell ) and cellular immunity ( t cell direct against intracellular pathogen ) .

antigens , also call immunogen , be molecule that activate adaptive immunity .
a single antigen possess small epitope , each capable of induce a specific adaptive immune response .

an antigen 's ability to stimulate an immune response depend on several factor , include - pron - molecular class , molecular complexity , and size .

antibodies ( immunoglobulin ) be y - shape glycoprotein with two fab site for bind antigen and an fc portion involve in complement activation and opsonization .

the five class of antibody be igm , igg , iga , ige , and igd , each differ in size , arrangement , location within the body , and function .
the five primary function of antibody be neutralization , opsonization , agglutination , complement activation , and antibody - dependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity ( adcc ) .
one  eight  .  two major histocompatibility complexes and antigen - presenting cells

major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) be a collection of gene code for glycoprotein molecule express on the surface of all nucleate cell .

mhc i molecule be express on all nucleated cell and be essential for presentation of normal " self " antigen .
cell that become infect by intracellular pathogen can present foreign antigen on mhc i as well , mark the infect cell for destruction .
 mhc ii molecule be express only on the surface of antigen - present cell ( macrophage , dendritic cell , and b cell ) .
antigen presentation with mhc ii be essential for the activation of t cell .

antigen - present cell ( apcs ) primarily ingest pathogen by phagocytosis , destroy - pron - in the phagolysosome , process the protein antigen , and select the most antigenic / immunodominant epitope with mhc ii for presentation to t cell .

cross - presentation be a mechanism of antigen presentation and t - cell activation use by dendritic cell not directly infect by the pathogen  - pron - involve phagocytosis of the pathogen but presentation on mhc i rather than mhc ii .
one  eight  .  three t lymphocytes and cellular immunity

immature t lymphocyte be produce in the red bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation .

thymic selection be a three - step process of negative and positive selection that determine which t cell will mature and exit the thymus into the peripheral bloodstream .
 central tolerance involve negative selection of self - reactive t cell in the thymus , and peripheral tolerance link to learning chapter one  eight
 adaptive specific host defenses eight  one  three involve anergy and regulatory t cell that prevent self - reactive immune response and autoimmunity .

the tcr be similar in structure to immunoglobulin , but less complex .
million of unique epitope - bind tcr be encode through a process of genetic rearrangement of v , d , and j gene segment .

t cell can be divide into three class - helper t cell , cytotoxic t cell , and regulatory t cell - base on - pron - expression of cd four or cd eight , the mhc molecule with which - pron - interact for activation , and - pron - respective function .
 activate helper t cell differentiate into th one , th two , th one  seven , or memory t cell subtype .
differentiation be direct by the specific cytokine to which - pron - be expose .
th one , th two , and th one  seven perform different function relate to stimulation of adaptive and innate immune defense .
memory t cell be long - live cell that can respond quickly to secondary exposure .

once activate , cytotoxic t cell target and kill cell infect with intracellular pathogen .
killing require recognition of specific pathogen epitope present on the cell surface use mhc i molecule .
killing be mediate by perforin and granzyme that induce apoptosis .

superantigen be bacterial or viral protein that cause a nonspecific activation of helper t cell , lead to an excessive release of cytokine ( cytokine storm ) and a systemic , potentially fatal inflammatory response .
one  eight  .  four b lymphocytes and humoral immunity  b lymphocyte or b cell produce antibody involve in humoral immunity .
b cell be produce in the bone marrow , where the initial stage of maturation occur , and travel to the spleen for final step of maturation into naïve mature b cell .
 b - cell receptor ( bcr ) be membrane - bind monomeric form of igd and igm that bind specific antigen epitope with - pron - fab antigen - bind region .
diversity of antigen bind specificity be create by genetic rearrangement of v , d , and j segment similar to the mechanism use for tcr diversity .

protein antigen be call t - dependent antigen because - pron - can only activate b cell with the cooperation of helper t cell .
other molecule class do not require t cell cooperation and be call t - independent antigen .

t cell - independent activation of b cell involve cross - linkage of bcr by repetitive nonprotein antigen epitope .
- pron - be characterize by the production of igm by plasma cell and do not produce memory b cell .

t cell - dependent activation of b cell involve processing and presentation of protein antigen to helper t cell , activation of the b cell by cytokine secrete from activate th two cell , and plasma cell that produce different class of antibody as a result of class switching .
memory b cell be also produce .

secondary exposure to t - dependent antigen result in a secondary antibody response initiate by memory b cell .
the secondary response develop more quickly and produce high and more sustained level of antibody with high affinity for the specific antigen .
one  eight  .  five vaccines 
adaptive immunity can be divide into four distinct classification  natural active immunity , natural passive immunity , artificial passive immunity , and artificial active immunity .

artificial active immunity be the foundation for vaccination and vaccine development .
vaccination program not only confer artificial immunity on individual , but also foster herd immunity in population .

variolation against smallpox originate in the one  zero th century in china , but the procedure be risky because - pron - could cause the disease - pron - be intend to prevent .
modern vaccination be develop by edward jenner , who develop the practice of inoculate patient with infectious material from cowpox lesion to prevent smallpox .
 live attenuate vaccine and inactivate vaccine contain whole pathogen that be weak , kill , or inactivate .
subunit vaccine , toxoid vaccine , and conjugate vaccine contain acellular component with antigen that stimulate an immune response .
chapter one  nine disease of the immune system
figure one  nine  .  one bee sting and other allergen can cause life - threaten , systemic allergic reaction .
sensitive individual may need to carry an epinephrine auto - injector ( e . g . , epipen ) in case of a sting .
a bee - ste allergy be an example of an immune response that be harmful to the host rather than protective  epinephrine counteract the severe drop in blood pressure that can result from the immune response .
( credit right 
modification of work by carol bleistine ) chapter outline
one  nine  .  one hypersensitivities one  nine  .  two autoimmune disorders one  nine  .  three organ transplantation and rejection one  nine  .  four
immunodeficiency one  nine  .  five cancer immunobiology and
immunotherapy introduction
an allergic reaction be an immune response to a type of antigen call an allergen .
allergen can be find in many different item , from peanut and insect sting to latex and some drug .
unlike other kind of antigen , allergen be not necessarily associate with pathogenic microbe , and many allergen provoke no immune response at all in most people .
allergic response vary in severity .
some be mild and localized , like hay fever or hive , but other can result in systemic , life - threaten reaction .
anaphylaxis , for example , be a rapidly develop allergic reaction that can cause a dangerous drop in blood pressure and severe swelling of the throat that may close off the airway .
allergy be just one example of how the immune system - the system normally responsible for prevent disease - can actually cause or mediate disease symptom .
in this chapter , - pron - will further explore allergy and other disorder of the immune system , include hypersensitivity reaction , autoimmune disease , transplant rejection , and disease associate with immunodeficiency .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  one  nine one  nine  .  one hypersensitivities learning objectives
 identify and compare the distinguish characteristic , mechanism , and major example of type i , ii , iii , and iv hypersensitivity
in adaptive specific host defenses , - pron - discuss the mechanism by which adaptive immune defense , both humoral and cellular , protect - pron - from infectious disease .
however , these same protective immune defense can also be responsible for undesirable reaction call hypersensitivity reaction .
hypersensitivity reaction be classify by - pron - immune mechanism .

type i hypersensitivity reaction involve immunoglobulin e ( ige ) antibody against soluble antigen , trigger mast cell degranulation .

type ii hypersensitivity reaction involve igg and igm antibody direct against cellular antigen , lead to cell damage mediate by other immune system effector .

type iii hypersensitivity reaction involve the interaction of igg , igm , and , occasionally , iga[ one ] antibodie with antigen to form immune complex .
accumulation of immune complex in tissue lead to tissue damage mediate by other immune system effector .
 type iv hypersensitivity reaction be t - cell – mediate reaction that can involve tissue damage mediate by activated macrophage and cytotoxic t cell .
type i hypersensitivitie
when a presensitized individual be expose to an allergen , - pron - can lead to a rapid immune response that occur almost immediately .
such a response be call an allergy and be classify as a type i hypersensitivity .
allergen may be seemingly harmless substance such as animal dander , mold , or pollen .
allergen may also be substance consider innately more hazardous , such as insect venom or therapeutic drug .
food intolerance can also yield allergic reaction as individual become sensitize to food such as peanut or shellfish ( figure one  nine  .  two ) .
regardless of the allergen , the first exposure activate a primary ige antibody response that sensitize an individual to type i hypersensitivity reaction upon subsequent exposure .
part one kerry , a four  zero  - year - old airline pilot , have make an appointment with - pron - primary care physician to discuss a rash that develop whenever - pron - spend time in the sun .
as - pron - explain to - pron - physician , - pron - do not seem like sunburn .
- pron - be careful not to spend too much time in the sun
and - pron - use sunscreen .
despite these precaution , the rash still appear , manifest as red , raise patch that get slightly scaly .
the rash persist for seven to one  zero day each time , and - pron - seem to largely go away on - pron - own .
lately , the rash have also begin to appear on - pron - cheek and above - pron - eye on either side of - pron - forehead .

be kerry right to be concern , or should - pron - simply be more careful about sun exposure ?

be there condition that may be bring on by sun exposure that kerry 's physician should be consider ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one .
d . s . strayer et al ( eds ) .
rubin 's pathology 
clinicopathologic foundations of medicine .
seven th ed .
two philadelphia , pa 
lippincott , williams and wilkins , two  zero  one  four .
eight  two  zero chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  two ( a ) allergens in plant pollen , show here in a colorized electron micrograph , may trigger allergic rhinitis or hay fever in sensitive individual .
( b )
skin rash be often associate with allergic reaction .
( c ) peanut can be eat safely by most people but can provoke severe allergic reaction in sensitive individual .
for susceptible individual , a first exposure to an allergen activate a strong th two cell response ( figure one  nine  .  three ) .
cytokine interleukin ( il ) -  four and il -  one  three from the th two cell
activate b cell specific to the same allergen , result in clonal proliferation , differentiation into plasma cell , and antibody - class switch from production of igm to production of ige .
the fragment crystallizable ( fc ) region of the ige antibody bind to specific receptor on the surface of mast cell throughout the body .
- pron - be estimate that each mast cell can bind up to five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero ige molecule , with each ige molecule have two allergen - specific fragment antigen - binding ( fab ) site available for bind allergen on subsequent exposure .
by the time this occur , the allergen be often no longer present and there be no allergic reaction , but the mast cell be prime for a subsequent exposure and the individual be sensitize to the allergen .
on subsequent exposure , allergen bind to multiple ige molecule on mast cell , cross - link the ige molecule .
within minute , this cross - linking of ige activate the mast cell and trigger degranulation , a reaction in which the content of the granule in the mast cell be release into the extracellular environment .
preformed component that be release from granule include histamine , serotonin , and bradykinin ( table one  nine  .  one ) .
the activated mast cell also release newly form lipid mediator ( leukotriene and prostaglandin from membrane arachadonic acid metabolism ) and cytokine such as tumor necrosis factor ( table one  nine  .  two ) .
the chemical mediator release by mast cell collectively cause the inflammation and sign and symptom associate with type i hypersensitivity reaction .
histamine stimulate mucus secretion in nasal passage and tear formation from lacrimal gland , promote the runny nose and watery eye of allergy .
interaction of histamine with nerve ending cause itch and sneezing .
the vasodilation cause by several of the mediator can result in hive , headache , angioedema ( swell that often affect the lip , throat , and tongue ) , and hypotension ( low blood pressure ) .
bronchiole constriction cause by some of the chemical mediator lead to wheeze , dyspnea ( difficulty breathing ) , cough , and , in more severe case , cyanosis ( bluish color to the skin or mucous membrane ) .
vomiting can result from stimulation of the vomit center in the cerebellum by histamine and serotonin .
histamine can also cause relaxation of intestinal smooth muscle and diarrhea .
selected preformed components of mast cell granules granule component activity
heparin stimulate the generation of bradykinin , which cause increase
vascular permeability , vasodilation , bronchiole constriction , and increase mucus secretion histamine causes smooth - muscle contraction , increase vascular permeability , increase mucus and tear formation
serotonin increase vascular permeability , cause vasodilation and smooth - muscle contraction table one  nine  .  one chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system eight  two  one selected newly form chemical mediators of inflammation and allergic response chemical mediator activity leukotriene causes smooth - muscle contraction and mucus secretion , increase vascular permeability prostaglandin causes smooth - muscle contraction and vasodilation
tnf - α ( cytokine ) cause inflammation and stimulate cytokine production by other cell type table one  nine  .  two figure one  nine  .  three
on first exposure to an allergen in a susceptible individual , antigen - present cell process and present allergen epitope with major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) ii to t helper cell .
b cell also process and present the same allergen epitope to th two cell , which release cytokine il -  four and il -  one  three to stimulate proliferation and differentiation into ige - secrete plasma cell .
the ige molecule bind to mast cell with - pron - fc region , sensitize the mast cell for activation with subsequent exposure to the allergen .
with each subsequent exposure , the allergen cross - link ige molecule on the mast cell , activate the mast cell and cause the release of preform chemical mediator from granule ( degranulation ) , as well as newly form chemical mediator that collectively cause the sign and symptom of type i hypersensitivity reaction .
type i hypersensitivity reaction can be either localized or systemic .
localize type i hypersensitivity reaction include hay fever rhinitis , hive , and asthma ( table one  nine  .  three ) .
systemic type i hypersensitivity reaction be refer to as anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock .
although anaphylaxis share many symptom common with the localize type i hypersensitivity reaction , the swelling of the tongue and trachea , blockage of airway , dangerous drop in blood pressure , and development of shock can make anaphylaxis especially severe and life - threaten .
in fact , death can eight  two  two chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five occur within minute of onset of sign and symptom .
late - phase reaction in type i hypersensitivity may develop four – one  two hour after the early phase and be mediate by eosinophil , neutrophil , and lymphocyte that have be recruit by chemotactic factor release from mast cell .
activation of these recruited cell lead to the release of more chemical mediator that cause tissue damage and latephase symptom of swelling and redness of the skin , cough , wheeze , and nasal discharge .
individual who possess gene for maladaptive trait , such as intense type i hypersensitivity reaction to otherwise harmless component of the environment , would be expect to suffer reduce reproductive success .
with this kind of evolutionary selective pressure , such trait would not be expect to persist in a population .
this suggest that type i hypersensitivity may have an adaptive function .
there be evidence that the ige produce during type i hypersensitivity reaction be actually mean to counter helminth infections[ two ] . helminths be one of few organism that possess protein that be target by ige .
in addition , there be evidence that helminth infection at a young age reduce the likelihood of type i hypersensitivitie to innocuous substance later in life .
thus - pron - may be that allergy be an unfortunate consequence of strong selection in the mammalian lineage or earlier for a defense against parasitic worm .
type i hypersensitivitie
common name cause
signs and symptoms allergy - induce asthma inhalation of allergen constriction of bronchi , labor breathing , coughing , chill , body ache anaphylaxis systemic reaction to allergen hives , itching , swelling of tongue and throat , nausea , vomiting , low blood pressure , shock hay fever inhalation of mold or pollen runny nose , watery eye , sneeze hives ( urticaria ) food or drug allergen , insect sting raise , bumpy skin rash with itching  bump may converge into large raise area table one  nine  .  three

what be the cell that cause a type i hypersensitivity reaction ?

describe the difference between immediate and late - phase type i hypersensitivity reaction .

list the sign and symptom of anaphylaxis .
the hygiene hypothesis
in most modern society , good hygiene be associate with regular bathing , and good health with cleanliness .
but some recent study suggest that the association between health and clean living may be a faulty one .
some go so far as to suggest that child should be encourage to play in the dirt - or even eat dirt[ three ]-for micro connections two .
c . m . fitzsimmons et al .
“
helminth allergens , parasite - specific ige , and - pron - protective role in human immunity .
" frontier in immunology five
( two  zero  one  five  )  four  seven .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  two  three the benefit of - pron - health .
this recommendation be base on the so - call hygiene hypothesis , which propose that childhood exposure to antigen from a diverse range of microbe lead to a better - function immune system later in life .
the hygiene hypothesis be first suggest in one  nine  eight  nine by david strachan[ four ] , who observe an inverse relationship between the number of old child in a family and the incidence of hay fever .
although hay fever in child have increase dramatically during the mid -  two  zero th century , incidence be significantly low in family with more child .
strachan propose that the low incidence of allergy in large family could be link to infection acquire from old sibling , suggest that these infection make child less susceptible to allergy .
strachan also argue that trend toward small family and a great emphasis on cleanliness in the two  zero th century have decrease exposure to pathogen and thus lead to high overall rate of allergy , asthma , and other immune disorder .
other researcher have observe an inverse relationship between the incidence of immune disorder and infectious disease that be now rare in industrialized country but still common in less industrialized countries . [ five ]
in developed nation , child under the age of five year be not expose to many of the microbe , molecule , and antigen - pron - almost certainly would have encounter a century ago .
the lack of early challenge to the immune system by organism with which human and - pron - ancestor evolve may result in failure in immune system function later in life .
type ii ( cytotoxic ) hypersensitivities immune reaction categorize as type ii hypersensitivity , or cytotoxic hypersensitivity , be mediate by igg and igm antibody bind to cell - surface antigen or matrix - associate antigen on basement membrane .
these antibody can either activate complement , result in an inflammatory response and lysis of the targeted cell , or - pron - can be involve in antibody - dependent cell - mediate cytotoxicity ( adcc ) with cytotoxic t cell .
in some case , the antigen may be a self - antigen , in which case the reaction would also be describe as an autoimmune disease .
( autoimmune disease be describe in autoimmune disorders ) .
in other case , antibody may bind to naturally occur , but exogenous , cell - surface molecule such as antigen associate with blood typing find on red blood cell ( rbc ) .
this lead to the coating of the rbc by antibody , activation of the complement cascade , and complement - mediate lysis of rbc , as well as opsonization of rbc for phagocytosis .
two example of type ii hypersensitivity reaction involve rbc be hemolytic transfusion reaction ( htr ) and hemolytic disease of the newborn ( hdn ) .
these type ii hypersensitivity reaction , which will be discuss in great detail , be summarize in table one  nine  .  four .
immunohematology be the study of blood and blood - form tissue in relation to the immune response .
antibodyinitiate response against blood cell be type ii hypersensitivity , thus fall into the field of immunohematology .
for student first learn about immunohematology , understand the immunological mechanism involve be make even more challenging by the complex nomenclature system use to identify different blood - group antigen , often call blood type .
the first blood - group antigen either use alphabetical name or be name for the first person know to produce antibody to the red blood cell antigen ( e . g . , kell , duffy , or diego ) .
however , in one  nine  eight  zero , the international society of blood transfusion ( isbt )
working party on terminology create a standard for blood - group terminology in an attempt to more consistently identify newly discover blood group antigen .
new antigen be now give a number and assign to a blood - group system , collection , or series .
however , even with this effort , blood - group nomenclature be still inconsistent .
three .
s . t . weiss .
“
eat dirt -
the hygiene hypothesis and allergic diseases .
"
new england journal of medicine
three  four  seven
no .
one  two ( two  zero  zero  two  )  nine  three  zero – nine  three  one . four .
d . p .
strachan “ hay fever , hygiene , and household size .
"
british medical journal two  nine  nine
no .
six  seven  one  zero
( one  nine  eight  nine  )  one  two  five  nine .
five .
h . okada et al .
"
the ‘ hygiene hypothesis ' for autoimmune and allergic diseases  an update .
" clinical and experimental immunology one  six  zero
no .
one (
two  zero  one  zero  )  one – nine . eight  two  four chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five common type ii hypersensitivities common name cause signs and symptoms hemolytic disease of the newborn ( hdn ) igg from mother cross the placenta , target the fetus ' rbcs for destruction anemia , edema , enlarged liver or spleen , hydrop ( fluid in body cavity ) , lead to death of newborn in severe case hemolytic transfusion reaction ( htr ) igg and igm bind to antigen on transfuse rbc , target donor rbc for destruction fever , jaundice , hypotension , disseminate intravascular coagulation , possibly lead to kidney failure and death table
one  nine  .  four abo blood group incompatibility
the recognition that individual have different blood type be first describe by karl landsteiner ( one  eight  six  eight – one  nine  four  three ) in the early one  nine  zero  zero s , base on - pron - observation that serum from one person could cause a clumping of rbc from another .
these study lead landsteiner to the identification of four distinct blood type .
subsequent research by other scientist determine that the four blood type be base on the presence or absence of surface carbohydrate "
a " and “ b , " and
this provide the foundation for the abo blood group system that be still in use today ( figure one  nine  .  four ) .
the function of these antigen be unknown , but some have be associate with normal biochemical function of the cell .
furthermore , abo blood type be inherit as allele ( one from each parent ) , and - pron - display pattern of dominant and codominant inheritance .
the allele for a and b blood type be codominant to each other , and both be dominant over blood type o . therefore , individual with genotype of aa or ao have type a blood and express the a carbohydrate antigen on the surface of - pron - rbc .
people with genotype of bb or bo have type b blood and express the b carbohydrate antigen on the surface of - pron - rbc .
those with a genotype of ab have type ab blood and express both a and b carbohydrate antigen on the surface of - pron - rbc .
finally , individual with a genotype of oo have type o blood and lack a and b
carbohydrate on the surface of - pron - rbc .
- pron - be important to note that the rbc of all four abo blood type share a common protein receptor molecule , and - pron - be the addition of specific carbohydrate to the protein receptor that determine a , b , and ab blood type .
the gene that be inherit for the a , b , and ab blood type encode enzyme that add the carbohydrate component to the protein receptor .
individual with o blood type still have the protein receptor but lack the enzyme that would add carbohydrate that would make - pron - red blood cell type a , b , or ab .
igm antibody in plasma that cross - react with blood group antigen not present on an individual 's own rbc be call isohemagglutinin ( figure one  nine  .  four ) .
isohemagglutinin be produce within the first few week after birth and persist throughout life .
these antibody be produce in response to exposure to environmental antigen from food and microorganism .
a person with type
a blood have a antigen on the surface of - pron - rbc and will produce anti - b antibody to environmental antigen that resemble the carbohydrate component of b antigen .
a person with type b blood have b antigen on the surface of - pron - rbc and will produce anti - a antibody to environmental antigen that be similar to the carbohydrate component of a antigen .
people with blood type
o lack both a and b antigen on - pron - rbc and , therefore , produce both anti - a and anti - b antibody .
conversely , people with ab blood type have both a and b antigen on - pron - rbc and , therefore , lack anti - a and anti - b antibody .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  two  five figure one  nine  .  four
a patient may require a blood transfusion because - pron - lack sufficient rbc ( anemia ) or because - pron - have experience significant loss of blood volume through trauma or disease .
although the blood transfusion be give to help the patient , - pron - be essential that the patient receive a transfusion with match abo blood type .
a transfusion with an incompatible abo blood type may lead to a strong , potentially lethal type ii hypersensitivity cytotoxic response call hemolytic transfusion reaction ( htr ) ( figure one  nine  .  five ) .
for instance , if a person with type b blood receive a transfusion of type a blood , - pron - anti - a antibody will bind to and agglutinate the transfuse rbc .
in addition , activation of the classical complement cascade will lead to a strong inflammatory response , and the complement membrane attack complex ( mac ) will mediate massive hemolysis of the transfuse rbc .
the debris from damage and destroy rbc can occlude blood vessel in the alveoli of the lung and the glomeruli of the kidney .
within one to two  four hour of an incompatible transfusion , the patient experience fever , chill , pruritus ( itching ) , urticaria ( hive ) , dyspnea , hemoglobinuria ( hemoglobin in the urine ) , and hypotension ( low blood pressure ) .
in the most serious reaction , dangerously low blood pressure can lead to shock , multi - organ failure , and death of the patient .
hospital , medical center , and associate clinical laboratory typically use hemovigilance system to minimize the risk of htr due to clerical error .
hemovigilance system be procedure that track transfusion information from the donor source and blood product obtain to the follow - up of recipient patient .
hemovigilance system use in many country identify htr and - pron - outcome through mandatory reporting ( e . g . , to the food and drug administration in the united states ) , and this information be valuable to help prevent such occurrence in the future .
for example , if an htr be find to be the result of laboratory or clerical error , additional blood product collect from the donor at that time can be locate and label correctly to avoid additional htr .
as a result of these measure , htrassociate death in the united states occur in about one per two million transfuse units . [ six ] six .
e . c . vamvakas , m . a . blajchman .
“
transfusion - relate mortality 
the ongoing risks of allogeneic blood transfusion and the available strategies for - pron - prevention .
"
blood one  one  three
no .
one  five ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  three  four  zero  six – three  four  one  seven .
eight  two  six
chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  five
a type ii hypersensitivity hemolytic transfusion reaction ( htr ) lead to hemolytic anemia .
blood from a type
a donor be administer to a patient with type b blood .
the anti - a isohemagglutinin igm antibody in the recipient bind to and agglutinate the incoming donor type
a red blood cell .
the bound anti - a antibody activate the classical complement cascade , result in destruction of the donor red blood cell .
rh factor
many different type of erythrocyte antigen have be discover since the description of the abo red cell antigen .
the second most frequently describe rbc antigen be rh factor , name after the rhesus macaque ( macaca mulatta ) factor identify by karl landsteiner and alexander weiner in one  nine  four  zero .
the rh system of rbc antigen be the most complex and immunogenic blood group system , with more than five  zero specificity identify to date .
of all the rh antigen , the one designate rho ( weiner ) or d ( fisher - race ) be the most immunogenic .
cell be classify as rh positive ( rh+ ) if the rho / d antigen be present or as rh negative ( rh− ) if the rho / d antigen be absent .
in contrast to the carbohydrate molecule that distinguish the abo blood group and be the target of igm isohemagglutinin in htr , the rh factor antigen be protein .
as discuss in b lymphocytes and humoral immunity , protein antigen activate b cell and antibody production through a t - cell – dependent mechanism , and the th two cell stimulate class switch from igm to other antibody class .
in the case of rh factor antigen , th two cell stimulate class switching to igg , and this have important implication for the mechanism of hdn .
like abo incompatibility , blood transfusion from a donor with the wrong rh factor antigen can cause a type ii hypersensitivity htr .
however , in contrast to the igm isohemagglutinin produce early in life through exposure to environmental antigen , production of anti - rh factor antibody require the exposure of an individual with rh− blood to rh+ positive rbc and activation of a primary antibody response .
although this primary antibody response can cause an htr in the transfusion patient , the hemolytic reaction would be delay up to two week during the extended lag period of a primary antibody response ( b lymphocytes and humoral immunity ) .
however , if the patient receive a subsequent transfusion with rh+ rbc , a more rapid htr would occur with anti - rh factor antibody already present in the blood .
furthermore , the rapid secondary antibody response would provide even more anti - rh factor antibody for the htr .
rh factor incompatibility between mother and fetus can also cause a type ii hypersensitivity hemolytic reaction , refer to as hemolytic disease of the newborn ( hdn )
( figure one  nine  .  six ) .
if an rh− woman carry an rh+ baby to term , the mother 's immune system can be expose to rh+ fetal red blood cell .
this exposure will usually occur during the last trimester of pregnancy and during the delivery process .
if this exposure occur , the rh+ fetal rbc will activate a primary adaptive immune response in the mother , and anti - rh factor igg antibody will be produce .
igg antibody be the only class of antibody that can cross the placenta from mother to fetus  however , in most case , the first rh+ baby be unaffected by these antibody because the first exposure typically occur late enough in the chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  two  seven pregnancy that the mother do not have time to mount a sufficient primary antibody response before the baby be bear .
if a subsequent pregnancy with an rh+ fetus occur , however , the mother 's second exposure to the rh factor antigen cause a strong secondary antibody response that produce large quantity of anti - rh factor igg . these antibody can cross the placenta from mother to fetus and cause hdn , a potentially lethal condition for the baby ( figure one  nine  .  six ) .
prior to the development of technique for diagnosis and prevention , rh factor incompatibility be the most common cause of hdn , result in thousand of infant death each year worldwide . [ seven ]
for this reason , the rh factor of prospective parent be regularly screen , and treatment have be develop to prevent hdn cause by rh incompatibility .
to prevent rh factor - mediate hdn , human rho ( d ) immune globulin ( e . g . , rhogam ) be inject intravenously or intramuscularly into the mother during the two  eight th week of pregnancy and within seven  two hour after delivery .
additional dos may be administer after event that may result in transplacental hemorrhage ( e . g . , umbilical blood sampling , chorionic villus sampling , abdominal trauma , amniocentesis ) .
this treatment be initiate during the first pregnancy with an rh+ fetus .
the anti - rh antibody in rho ( d ) immune globulin will bind to the rh factor of any fetal rbc that gain access to the mother 's bloodstream , prevent these rh+ cell from activate the mother 's primary antibody response .
without a primary anti - rh factor antibody response , the next pregnancy with an rh+ will have minimal risk of hdn .
however , the mother will need to be retreat with rho ( d ) immune globulin during that pregnancy to prevent a primary anti - rh antibody response that could threaten subsequent pregnancy .
figure one  nine  .  six ( a )
when an rh− mother have an rh+ fetus , fetal erythrocyte be introduce into the mother 's circulatory system before or during birth , lead to production of anti - rh igg antibody .
these antibody remain in the mother and , if - pron - become pregnant with a second rh+ baby , - pron - can cross the placenta and attach to fetal rh+ erythrocyte .
complement - mediate hemolysis of fetal erythrocyte result in a lack of sufficient cell for proper oxygenation of the fetus .
( b ) hdn can be prevent by administer rho ( d ) immune globulin during and after each pregnancy with an rh+ fetus .
the immune globulin bind fetal rh+ rbc that gain access to the mother 's bloodstream , prevent activation of - pron - primary immune response .
seven .
g . reali .
“
forty years of anti - d immunoprophylaxis .
"
blood transfusion five no .
one ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  three – six .
eight  two  eight chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five use this interactive blood typing game ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two actbloodtyping ) to reinforce - pron - knowledge of blood typing .

what happen to cell that possess incompatible antigen in a type ii hypersensitivity reaction ?

describe hemolytic disease of the newborn and explain how - pron - can be prevent .
part two kerry 's primary care physician be not sure why kerry seem to develop rash after spend time in the sun , so - pron - order a urinalysis and basic blood test .
the result reveal that kerry have proteinuria ( abnormal protein level in the urine ) , hemoglobinuria ( excess hemoglobin in the urine ) , and a low hematocrit ( rbc count ) .
these test suggest that kerry be suffer from a mild bout of hemolytic anemia .
the physician suspect that the problem may be autoimmune , so - pron - refer kerry to a rheumatologist for additional testing and diagnosis .

rheumatologist specialize in musculoskeletal disease such as arthritis , osteoporosis , and joint pain .
why may kerry 's physician refer - pron - to this particular type of specialist even though - pron - be exhibit none of these symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
type iii hypersensitivity type iii hypersensitivity be immune - complex reaction that be first characterize by nicolas maurice arthus ( one  eight  six  two – one  nine  four  five ) in one  nine  zero  three .
to produce antibody for experimental procedure , arthus immunize rabbit by inject - pron - with serum from horse .
however , while immunize rabbit repeatedly with horse serum , arthus notice a previously unreported and unexpected localized subcutaneous hemorrhage with edema at the site of injection .
this reaction develop within three to one  zero hour after injection .
this localized reaction to non - self serum protein be call an arthus reaction .
an arthus reaction occur when soluble antigen bind with igg in a ratio that result in the accumulation of antigen - antibody aggregate call immune complex .
a unique characteristic of type iii hypersensitivity be antibody excess ( primarily igg ) , couple with a relatively low concentration of antigen , result in the formation of small immune complex that deposit on the surface of the epithelial cell line the inner luman of small blood vessel or on the surface of tissue ( figure one  nine  .  seven ) .
this immune complex accumulation lead to a cascade of inflammatory event that include the follow  one . igg bind to antibody receptor on localize mast cell , result in mast - cell degranulation two .
complement activation with production of pro - inflammatory c three a and
c five a ( see chemical defenses )
three .
increase blood - vessel permeability with chemotactic recruitment of neutrophil and macrophage because these immune complex be not an optimal size and be deposit on cell surface , - pron - can not be link to learn clinical focus chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  two  nine phagocytose in the usual way by neutrophil and macrophage , which , in turn , be often describe as “ frustrated .
"
although phagocytosis do not occur , neutrophil degranulation result in the release of lysosomal enzyme that cause extracellular destruction of the immune complex , damaging localize cell in the process .
activation of coagulation pathway also occur , result in thrombi ( blood clot ) that occlude blood vessel and cause ischemia that can lead to vascular necrosis and localized hemorrhage .
systemic type iii hypersensitivity ( serum sickness ) occur when immune complex deposit in various body site , result in a more generalize systemic inflammatory response .
these immune complex involve non - self protein such as antibody produce in animal for artificial passive immunity ( see vaccines ) , certain drug , or microbial antigen that be continuously release over time during chronic infection ( e . g . , subacute bacterial endocarditis , chronic viral hepatitis ) .
the mechanism of serum sickness be similar to those describe in localized type iii hypersensitivity but involve widespread activation of mast cell , complement , neutrophil , and macrophage , which cause tissue destruction in area such as the kidney , joint , and blood vessel .
as a result of tissue destruction , symptom of serum sickness include chill , fever , rash , vasculitis , and arthritis .
development of glomerulonephritis or hepatitis be also possible .
autoimmune disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) and rheumatoid arthritis can also involve damage type iii hypersensitivity reaction when auto - antibody form immune complex with self antigen .
these condition be discuss in autoimmune disorders .
figure one  nine  .  seven type iii hypersensitivity and the system - pron - affect .
( a ) immune complex form and deposit in tissue .
complement activation , stimulation of an inflammatory response , and recruitment and activation of neutrophil result in damage to blood vessel , heart tissue , joint , skin , and / or kidney .
( b )
if the kidney be damage by a type iii hypersensitivity reaction , dialysis may be require .

why be antibody excess important in type iii hypersensitivity ?

describe the difference between the arthus reaction and serum sickness .
eight  three  zero
chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five diphtheria antitoxin antibacterial sera be much less commonly use now than in the past , have be replace by toxoid vaccine .
however , a diphtheria antitoxin produce in horse be one example of such a treatment that be still use in some part of the world .
although - pron - be not license by the fda for use in the united states , diphtheria antitoxin can be use to treat case of diphtheria , which be cause by the bacterium corynebacterium diphtheriae . [ eight ]
the treatment be not without risk , however .
serum sickness can occur when the patient develop an immune response to non - self horse protein .
immune complex be form between the horse protein and circulate antibody when the two exist in certain proportion .
these immune complex can deposit in organ , cause damage such as arthritis , nephritis , rash , and fever .
serum sickness be usually transient with no permanent damage unless the patient be chronically expose to the antigen , which can then result in irreversible damage to body site such as joint and kidney .
over time , phagocytic cell such as macrophage be able to clear the horse serum antigen , which result in improvement of the patient 's condition and a decrease in symptom as the immune response dissipate .
part three kerry do not make - pron - to the rheumatologist .
- pron - have a seizure as - pron - be leave - pron - primary care physician 's office .
- pron - be quickly rush to the emergency department , where - pron - primary care physician relate - pron - medical history and recent test result .
the emergency department physician call in the rheumatologist on staff at the hospital for consultation .
base on the symptom and test result , the rheumatologist suspect that kerry have lupus and order a pair of blood test  an antinuclear antibody test ( ana ) to look for antibody that bind to dna and another test that look for antibody that bind to a self - antigen call the smith antigen ( sm ) .

base on the blood test order , what type of reaction do the rheumatologist suspect be cause kerry 's seizure ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
type iv hypersensitivity type iv hypersensitivity be not mediate by antibody like the other three type of hypersensitivity .
rather , type iv hypersensitivity be regulate by t cell and involve the action of effector cell .
these type of hypersensitivity can be organize into three subcategorie base on t - cell subtype , type of antigen , and the result effector mechanism ( table one  nine  .  five ) .
in the first type iv subcategory , cd four th one  - mediated reaction be describe as delay - type hypersensitivity ( dth ) .
the sensitization step involve the introduction of antigen into the skin and phagocytosis by local antigen presenting cell ( apcs ) .
the apc activate helper t cell , stimulate clonal proliferation and differentiation into memory th one cell .
upon subsequent exposure to the antigen , these sensitize memory th one cell release cytokine that activate macrophage , and activate macrophage be responsible for much of the tissue damage .
example of this th one  - mediated hypersensitivity be observe in tuberculin the mantoux skin test and contact dermatitis , such as occur in latex allergy reaction .
in the second type iv subcategory , cd four th two  - mediat reaction result in chronic asthma or chronic allergic rhinitis .
in these case , the soluble antigen be first inhale , result in eosinophil recruitment and activation with the release micro connections clinical focus eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ diphtheria antitoxin .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / diphtheria / dat . html .
accessed march two  five , two  zero  one  six .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  three  one of cytokine and inflammatory mediator .
in the third type iv subcategory , cd eight cytotoxic t lymphocyte ( ctl ) - mediate reaction be associate with tissue transplant rejection and contact dermatitis ( figure one  nine  .  eight ) .
for this form of cell - mediate hypersensitivity , apc process and present the antigen with mhc i to naïve cd eight t cell .
when these naïve cd eight t cell be activate , - pron - proliferate and differentiate into ctl .
activate th one cell can also enhance the activation of the ctl .
the activate ctl then target and induce granzyme - mediate apoptosis in cell present the same antigen with mhc i . these target cell could be " self " cell that have absorb the foreign antigen ( such as with contact dermatitis due to poison ivy ) , or - pron - could be transplant tissue cell display foreign antigen from the donor .
figure one  nine  .  eight exposure to hapten antigen in poison ivy can cause contact dermatitis , a type iv hypersensitivity .
( a )
the first exposure to poison ivy do not result in a reaction .
however , sensitization stimulate helper t cell , lead to production of memory helper t cell that can become reactivate on future exposure .
( b )
upon secondary exposure , the memory helper t cell become reactivate , produce inflammatory cytokine that stimulate macrophage and cytotoxic t cell to induce an inflammatory lesion at the expose site .
this lesion , which will persist until the allergen be remove , can inflict significant tissue damage if - pron - continue long enough .
type iv hypersensitivities subcategory antigen effector mechanism examples one soluble antigen
activated macrophage damage tissue and promote inflammatory response contact dermatitis ( e . g . , exposure to latex ) and delay - type hypersensitivity ( e . g . , tuberculin reaction )
two soluble antigen eosinophil recruitment and activation release cytokine and pro - inflammatory chemical chronic asthma and chronic allergic rhinitis table
one  nine  .  five eight  three  two chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five type iv hypersensitivities subcategory antigen effector mechanism examples three cellassociated antigen ctl - mediate cytotoxicity contact dermatitis ( e . g . , contact with poison ivy ) and tissue - transplant rejection table one  nine  .  five

describe the three subtype of type iv hypersensitivity .

explain how t cell contribute to tissue damage in type iv hypersensitivity .
use delay hypersensitivity to test for
tb austrian pediatrician clemans von pirquet ( one  eight  seven  four – one  nine  two  nine ) first describe allergy mechanism , include type iii serum sickness . [ nine ]
- pron - interest lead to the development of a test for tuberculosis ( tb ) , use the tuberculin antigen , base on early work identify the tb pathogen perform by robert koch .
pirquet 's method involve scarification , which result in simultaneous multiple puncture , use a device with an array of needle to break the skin numerous time in a small area .
the device pirquet use be similar to the tine test device with four needle see in figure one  nine  .  nine .
the tip of all the needle in the array be coat with tuberculin , a protein extract of tb bacteria , effectively introduce the tuberculin into the skin .
one to three day later , the area can be examine for a delay hypersensitivity reaction , sign of which include swell and redness .
as - pron - can imagine , scarification be not a pleasant experience , [ one  zero ] and the numerous skin puncture put the patient at risk of develop bacterial infection of the skin .
mantoux modify pirquet 's test to use a single subcutaneous injection of purified tuberculin material .
a positive test , which be indicate by a delay localize swell at the injection site , do not necessarily mean that the patient be currently infect with active tb .
because type iv ( delay - type ) hypersensitivity be mediate by reactivation of memory t cell , such cell may have be create recently ( due to an active current infection ) or year prior ( if a patient have tb and have spontaneously clear - pron - , or if - pron - have go into latency ) .
however , the test can be use to confirm infection in case in which symptom in the patient or finding on a radiograph suggest - pron - presence .
micro connections nine .
b . huber “ one  zero  zero
jahre allergie 
clemens von pirquet – sein
allergiebegriff und das ihm zugrunde liegende krankheitsverständnis .
”
wiener klinische wochenschrift one  one  eight
no .
one  nine – two  zero ( two  zero  zero  six  )  five  seven  three – five  seven  nine . one  zero .
c . a . stewart .
"
the pirquet test  comparison of the scarification and the puncture methods of application .
"
archives of pediatrics and adolescent medicine three  five
no .
three
( one  nine  two  eight  )  three  eight  eight – three  nine  one .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  three  three figure one  nine  .  nine
the modern version of pirquet 's scarification be the tine test , which use device like this to administer tuberculin antigen into the skin , usually on the inside of the forearm .
the tine test be consider less reliable than the mantoux test .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention ) hypersensitivity pneumonitis
some disease cause by hypersensitivity be not cause exclusively by one type .
for example , hypersensitivity pneumonitis ( hp ) , which be often an occupational or environmental disease , occur when the lung become inflamed due to an allergic reaction to inhale dust , endospore , bird feather , bird dropping , mold , or chemical .
hp go by many different name associate with various form of exposure ( figure one  nine  .  one  zero ) .
hp associate with bird dropping be sometimes call pigeon fancier 's lung or poultry worker 's lung - both common in bird breeder and handler .
cheese handler 's disease , farmer 's lung , sauna taker ' disease , and hot - tub lung be other name for hp associate with exposure to mold in various environment .
pathology associate with hp can be due to both type iii ( mediate by immune complex ) and type iv ( mediate by th one cell and macrophage ) hypersensitivity .
repeat exposure to allergen can cause alveolitis due to the formation of immune complex in the alveolar wall of the lung accompany by fluid accumulation , and the formation of granuloma and other lesion in the lung as a result of th one  - mediated macrophage activation .
alveolitis with fluid and granuloma formation result in poor oxygen perfusion in the alveoli , which , in turn , can cause symptom such as cough , dyspnea , chill , fever , sweating , myalgia , headache , and nausea .
symptom may occur as quickly as two hour after exposure and can persist for week if leave untreated .
eight  three  four chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  one  zero occupational exposure to dust , mold , and other allergen can result in hypersensitivity pneumonitis .
( a ) people expose daily to large number of bird may be susceptible to poultry worker 's lung .
( b ) worker in a cheese factory may become sensitized to different type of mold and develop cheese handler 's disease .
( credit a  modification of work by the global orphan project )

explain why hypersensitivity pneumonitis be consider an occupational disease .
figure one  nine  .  one  one summarize the mechanism and effect of each type of hypersensitivity discuss in this section .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  three  five figure one  nine  .  one  one component of the immune system cause four type of hypersensitivity .
notice that type i – iii be bcell / antibody - mediate hypersensitivity , whereas type iv hypersensitivity be exclusively a t - cell phenomenon .
diagnosis of hypersensitivities diagnosis of type i hypersensitivitie be a complex process require several diagnostic test in addition to a welldocumented patient history .
serum ige level can be measure , but elevate ige alone do not confirm allergic disease .
as part of the process to identify the antigen responsible for a type i reaction allergy , test through a prick puncture skin test ( ppst ) or an intradermal test can be perform .
ppst be carry out with the introduction of allergen in a series of superficial skin prick on the patient 's back or arm ( figure one  nine  .  one  two ) .
ppst be consider to be the most convenient and least expensive way to diagnose allergy , accord to the us joint council of allergy and the european academy of allergy and immunology .
the second type of testing , the intradermal test , require injection into the dermis with a small needle .
this needle , also know as a tuberculin needle , be attach to a syringe contain a small amount of allergen .
both the ppst and the intradermal test be observe for one  five – two  zero minute for a wheal - flare reaction to the allergen .
measurement of any wheal ( a raise , itchy bump ) and flare ( redness ) within minute indicate a type i hypersensitivity , and the large the wheal - flare reaction , the great the patient 's sensitivity to the allergen .
type iii hypersensitivity can often be misdiagnose because of - pron - nonspecific inflammatory nature .
the symptom be easily visible , but - pron - may be associate with any of a number of other disease .
a strong , comprehensive patient history be crucial to proper and accurate diagnosis .
test use to establish the diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis ( result from type iii hypersensitivity ) include bronchoalveolar lavage ( bal ) , pulmonary function test , and high - resolution compute tomography ( hrct ) .
eight  three  six chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  one  two result of an allergy skin - prick test to test for type i hypersensitivity to a group of potential allergen .
a positive result be indicate by a raise area ( wheal ) and surround redness ( flare ) .
( credit  modification of work by “ oakleyoriginals” / flickr )

describe the prick puncture skin test .

explain why type iii hypersensitivity can be difficult to diagnose .
treatment of hypersensitivities allergic reaction can be treat in various way .
prevention of allergic reaction can be achieve by desensitization ( hyposensitization ) therapy , which can be use to reduce the hypersensitivity reaction through repeat injection of allergen .
extremely dilute concentration of know allergen ( determine from the allergen test ) be inject into the patient at prescribed interval ( e . g . , weekly ) .
the quantity of allergen deliver by the shot be slowly increase over a buildup period until an effective dose be determine and that dose be maintain for the duration of treatment , which can last year .
patient be usually encourage to remain in the doctor 's office for three  zero minute after receive the injection in case the allergen administer cause a severe systemic reaction .
doctor ' office that administer desensitization therapy must be prepared to provide resuscitation and drug treatment in the case of such an event .
desensitization therapy be use for insect sting allergy and environmental allergy .
the allergy shot elicit the production of different interleukin and igg antibody response instead of ige .
when excess allergen - specific igg antibody be produce and bind to the allergen , - pron - can act as block antibody to neutralize the allergen before - pron - can bind ige on mast cell .
there be early study use oral therapy for desensitization of food allergy that be promising . [ one  one ][ one  two ]
these study involve feed child who have allergy tiny amount of the allergen ( e . g . , peanut one  one .
c . l . schneider et al .
“
a pilot study of omalizumab to facilitate rapid oral desensitization in high - risk peanut - allergic patients .
" journal of allergy and clinical immunology one  three  two
no .
six
( two  zero  one  three  )  one  three  six  eight – one  three  seven  four . one  two .
p . varshney et al .
“
a randomize controlled study of peanut oral immunotherapy 
clinical desensitization and modulation of the allergic response .
" journal of allergy and clinical immunology
one  two  seven
no .
three
( two  zero  one  one  )  six  five  four – six  six  zero .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  three  seven flour ) or related protein over time .
many of the subject show reduced severity of reaction to the food allergen after the therapy .
there be also therapy design to treat severe allergic reaction .
emergency systemic anaphylaxis be treat initially with an epinephrine injection , which can counteract the drop in blood pressure .
individual with know severe allergy often carry a self - administer auto - injector that can be use in case of exposure to the allergen ( e . g . , an insect sting or accidental ingestion of a food that cause a severe reaction ) .
by self - administer an epinephrine shot ( or sometimes two ) , the patient can stem the reaction long enough to seek medical attention .
follow - up treatment generally involve give the patient antihistamine and slow - act corticosteroid for several day after the reaction to prevent potential late - phase reaction .
however , the effect of antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment be not well study and be use base on theoretical consideration .
treatment of milder allergic reaction typically involve antihistamine and other anti - inflammatory drug .
a variety of antihistamine drug be available , in both prescription and over - the - counter strength .
there be also antileukotriene and antiprostaglandin drug that can be use in tandem with antihistamine drug in a combined ( and more effective ) therapy regime .
treatment of type iii hypersensitivity include prevent further exposure to the antigen and the use of antiinflammatory drug .
some condition can be resolve when exposure to the antigen be prevent .
anti - inflammatory corticosteroid inhaler can also be use to diminish inflammation to allow lung lesion to heal .
systemic corticosteroid treatment , oral or intravenous , be also common for type iii hypersensitivity affect body system .
treatment of hypersensitivity pneumonitis include avoid the allergen , along with the possible addition of prescription steroid such as prednisone to reduce inflammation .
treatment of type iv hypersensitivity include antihistamine , anti - inflammatory drug , analgesic , and , if possible , eliminate further exposure to the antigen .
 describe desensitization therapy .

explain the role of epinephrine in treatment of hypersensitivity reaction .
one  nine  .  two autoimmune disorders learning objectives
 explain why autoimmune disorder develop 
provide a few example of organ - specific and systemic autoimmune disease
in one  nine  seven  zero , artist walt kelly develop a poster promote earth day , feature a character from pogo , - pron - daily newspaper comic strip .
in the poster , pogo look out across a litter - strew forest and say wryly ,
“
- pron - have meet the enemy and - pron - be - pron - .
"
pogo be not talk about the human immune system , but - pron - very well could have be .
although the immune system protect the body by attack invade “ enemy " ( pathogen ) , in some case , the immune system can mistakenly identify the body 's own cell as the enemy , result in autoimmune disease .
autoimmune disease be those in which the body be attack by - pron - own specific adaptive immune response .
in normal , healthy state , the immune system induce tolerance , which be a lack of an anti - self immune response .
however , with autoimmunity , there be a loss of immune tolerance , and the mechanism responsible for autoimmune disease include type ii , iii , and iv hypersensitivity reaction .
autoimmune disease can have a variety of mixed symptom that flare up and disappear , make diagnosis difficult .
the cause of autoimmune disease be a combination of the individual ' s genetic makeup and the effect of environmental influence , such as sunlight , infection , medication , and environmental chemical .
however , the eight  three  eight chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five vagueness of this list reflect - pron - poor understanding of the etiology of these disease .
except in a very few specific disease , the initiation event ( s ) of most autoimmune state have not be fully characterize .
there be several possible cause for the origin of autoimmune disease and autoimmunity be likely due to several factor .
evidence now suggest that regulatory t and b cell play an essential role in the maintenance of tolerance and prevention of autoimmune response .
the regulatory t cell be especially important for inhibit autoreactive t cell that be not eliminate during thymic selection and escape the thymus ( see t lymphocytes and cellular immunity ) .
in addition , antigen mimicry between pathogen antigen and - pron - own self antigen can lead to crossreactivity and autoimmunity .
hide self - antigen may become expose because of trauma , drug interaction , or disease state , and trigger an autoimmune response .
all of these factor could contribute to autoimmunity .
ultimately , damage to tissue and organ in the autoimmune disease state come as a result of inflammatory response that be inappropriate  therefore , treatment often include immunosuppressive drug and corticosteroid .
organ - specific autoimmune diseases
some autoimmune disease be consider organ specific , mean that the immune system target specific organ or tissue .
example of organ - specific autoimmune disease include celiac disease , grave disease , hashimoto thyroiditis , type i diabetes mellitus , and addison disease .
celiac disease celiac disease be largely a disease of the small intestine , although other organ may be affect .
people in - pron - three  zero and four  zero , and child be most commonly affect , but celiac disease can begin at any age .
- pron - result from a reaction to protein , commonly call gluten , find mainly in wheat , barley , rye , and some other grain .
the disease have several genetic cause ( predisposition ) and poorly understand environmental influence .
on exposure to gluten , the body produce various autoantibody and an inflammatory response .
the inflammatory response in the small intestine lead to a reduction in the depth of the microvilli of the mucosa , which hinder absorption and can lead to weight loss and anemia .
the disease be also characterize by diarrhea and abdominal pain , symptom that be often misdiagnose as irritable bowel syndrome .
diagnosis of celiac disease be accomplish from serological test for the presence of primarily iga antibody to component of gluten , the transglutinaminase enzyme , and autoantibody to endomysium , a connective tissue surround muscle fiber .
serological test be typically follow up with endoscopy and biopsy of the duodenal mucosa .
serological screen survey have find about one % of individual in the united kingdom be positive even though - pron - do not all display symptoms . [ one  three ]
this early recognition allow for more careful monitoring and prevention of severe disease .
celiac disease be treat with complete removal of gluten - contain food from the diet , which result in improved symptom and reduced risk of complication .
other theoretical approach include breed grain that do not contain the immunologically reactive component or develop dietary supplement that contain enzyme that break down the protein component that cause
the immune response . [ one  four ] disorder of the thyroid graves disease be the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the united states .
symptom of graves disease result from the production of thyroid - stimulating immunoglobulin ( tsi ) also call tsh - receptor antibody .
tsi target and bind to the receptor for thyroid stimulate hormone ( tsh ) , which be naturally produce by the pituitary gland .
tsi may cause conflicting symptom because - pron - may stimulate the thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone or block thyroid hormone production entirely , make diagnosis more difficult .
sign and symptom of grave disease include heat intolerance , rapid and irregular heartbeat , weight loss , goiter ( a swollen thyroid gland , protrude under the skin of the throat [ figure one  nine  .  one  three ] ) and exophthalmia ( bulge eye ) often refer to as grave one  three .
d . a . van heel , j . west .
“
recent advances in coeliac disease .
"
gut five  five
no . seven
( two  zero  zero  six  )  one  zero  three  seven - one  zero  four  six .
one  four . ibid .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  three  nine ophthalmopathy ( figure one  nine  .  one  four ) .
the most common cause of hypothyroidism in the united states be hashimoto thyroiditis , also call chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis .
patient with hashimoto thyroiditis often develop a spectrum of different disease because - pron - be more likely to develop additional autoimmune disease such as addison disease ( discuss later in this section ) , type one diabetes , rheumatoid arthritis , and celiac disease .
hashimoto thyroiditis be a th one cell - mediate disease that occur when the thyroid gland be attack by cytotoxic lymphocyte , macrophage , and autoantibody .
this autoimmune response lead to numerous symptom that include goiter ( figure one  nine  .  one  three ) , cold intolerance , muscle weakness , painful and stiff joint , depression , and memory loss .
figure one  nine  .  one  three goiter , a hypertrophy of the thyroid , be a symptom of graves disease and hashimoto thyroiditis .
figure one  nine  .  one  four exophthalmia , or grave ophthalmopathy , be a sign of graves disease .
( credit  modification of work by jonathan trobe , university of michigan kellogg eye center )
type one diabetes juvenile diabete , or type one diabetes mellitus , be usually diagnose in child and young adult .
- pron - be a t - celldependent autoimmune disease characterize by the selective destruction of the β cell of the islet of langerhans in the pancrea by cd four th one  - mediated cd eight t cell , anti - β - cell antibody , and macrophage activity .
there be also evidence that viral infection can have either a potentiating or inhibitory role in the development of type one diabetes ( t one d ) mellitus .
the destruction of the β cell cause a lack of insulin production by the pancrea .
in t one d , β - cell destruction may take place over several year , but symptom of hyperglycemia , extreme increase in thirst and urination , weight loss , and extreme fatigue usually have a sudden onset , and diagnosis usually do not occur until most β cell have already be destroy .
eight  four  zero chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five autoimmune addison disease destruction of the adrenal gland ( the gland lie above the kidney that produce glucocorticoid , mineralocorticoid , and sex steroid ) be the cause of addison disease , also call primary adrenal insufficiency ( pai ) .
today , up to eight  zero % of addison disease case be diagnose as autoimmune addison disease ( aad ) , which be cause by an autoimmune response to adrenal tissue disrupt adrenal function .
disruption of adrenal function cause impair metabolic process that require normal steroid hormone level , cause sign and symptom throughout the body .
there be evidence that both humoral and cd four th one  - driven cd eight t - cell – mediate immune mechanism be direct at the adrenal cortex in aad .
there be also evidence that the autoimmune response be associate with autoimmune destruction of other endocrine gland as well , such as the pancrea and thyroid , condition collectively refer to as autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome ( aps ) .
in up to eight  zero % of patient with aad , antibody be produce to three enzyme involve in steroid synthesis 
two  one  - hydroxylase ( two  one  - oh ) , one  seven α - hydroxylase , and cholesterol side - chain – cleaving enzyme . [ one  five ] the most common autoantibody find in aad be to two  one  - oh , and antibody to any of the key enzyme for steroid production be diagnostic for aad .
the adrenal cortex cell be target , destroy , and replace with fibrous tissue by immune - mediate inflammation .
in some patient , at least nine  zero % of the adrenal cortex be destroy before symptom become diagnostic .
symptom of aad include weakness , nausea , decrease appetite , weight loss , hyperpigmentation ( figure one  nine  .  one  five ) , hyperkalemia ( elevated blood potassium level ) , hyponatremia ( decrease blood sodium level ) , hypoglycemia ( decrease level of blood sugar ) , hypotension ( decrease blood pressure ) , anemia , lymphocytosis ( decreased level of white blood cell ) , and fatigue .
under extreme stress , such as surgery , accidental trauma , or infection , patient with aad may experience an adrenal crisis that cause the patient to vomit , experience abdominal pain , back or leg cramp , and even severe hypotension lead to shock .
figure one  nine  .  one  five hyperpigmentation be a sign of addison disease .
( credit  modification of work by petros perros )

what be the name of autoimmune disease that interfere with hormone gland function ?

describe how the mechanism of graves disease and hashimoto thyroiditis differ .

name the cell that be destroy in type one diabetes mellitus and describe the result .
systemic autoimmune diseases
whereas organ - specific autoimmune disease target specific organ or tissue , systemic autoimmune disease be one  five .
p . martorell et al .
“
autoimmunity in addison 's disease .
"
netherlands journal of medicine
six  zero
no .
seven
( two  zero  zero  two  )  two  six  nine - two  seven  five .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  four  one more generalize , target multiple organ or tissue throughout the body .
example of systemic autoimmune disease include multiple sclerosis , myasthenia gravi , psoriasis , rheumatoid arthritis , and systemic lupus erythematosus .
multiple sclerosis multiple sclerosis ( ms ) be an autoimmune central nervous system disease that affect the brain and spinal cord .
lesion in multiple location within the central nervous system be a hallmark of multiple sclerosis and be cause by infiltration of immune cell across the blood - brain barrier .
the immune cell include t cell that promote inflammation , demyelination , and neuron degeneration , all of which disrupt neuronal signaling .
symptom of ms include visual disturbance  muscle weakness  difficulty with coordination and balance  sensation such as numbness , prickling , or " pin and needle "  and cognitive and memory problem .
myasthenia gravis autoantibodies direct against acetylcholine receptor ( achrs ) in the synaptic cleft of neuromuscular junction lead to myasthenia gravi ( figure one  nine  .  one  six ) .
anti - achr antibody be high - affinity iggs and - pron - synthesis require activated cd four t cell to interact with and stimulate b cell .
once produce , the anti - achr antibody affect neuromuscular transmission by at least three mechanism 

complement binding and activation at the neuromuscular junction

accelerated achr endocytosis of molecule cross - link by antibody 
functional achr blocking , which prevent normal acetylcholine attachment to , and activation of , achr
regardless of the mechanism , the effect of anti - achr be extreme muscle weakness and potentially death through respiratory arrest in severe case .
eight  four  two chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  one  six myasthenia gravi and impair muscle contraction .
( a ) normal release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine stimulate muscle contraction .
( b )
in myasthenia gravi , autoantibody block the receptor for acetylcholine ( achr ) on muscle cell , result in paralysis .
psoriasis psoriasis be a skin disease that cause itchy or sore patch of thick , red skin with silvery scale on elbow , knee , scalp , back , face , palm , foot , and sometimes other area .
some individual with psoriasis also get a form of arthritis call psoriatic arthritis , in which the joint can become inflamed .
psoriasis result from the complex interplay between keratinocyte , dendritic cell , and t cell , and the cytokine produce by these various cell .
in a process call cell turnover , skin cell that grow deep in the skin rise to the surface .
normally , this process take a month .
in psoriasis , as a result of cytokine activation , cell turnover happen in just a few day .
the thick inflamed patch of skin that be characteristic of psoriasis develop because the skin cell rise too fast .
rheumatoid arthritis
the most common chronic inflammatory joint disease be rheumatoid arthritis ( ra ) ( figure one  nine  .  one  seven ) and - pron - be still a major medical challenge because of unsolved question relate to the environmental and genetic cause of the disease .
ra involve type iii hypersensitivity reaction and the activation of cd four t cell , result in chronic release of the inflammatory cytokine il -  one , il -  six , and tumor necrosis factor - α ( tnf - α ) .
the activated cd four t cell also stimulate the production of rheumatoid factor ( rf ) antibody and anticyclic citrullinate peptide antibody ( anti - ccp ) that form immune complex .
increase level of acute - phase protein , such as c - reactive protein ( crp ) , be also produce as part of the inflammatory process and participate in complement fixation with the antibody on the immune complex .
the formation of immune complex and reaction to the immune factor cause an inflammatory process in joint , particularly in the hand , foot , and leg .
diagnosis of ra be base on elevated level of rf , anti - ccp , quantitative crp , and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( esr ) ( modifiedwestergren ) .
in addition , radiograph , ultrasound , or magnetic resonance imaging scan can identify joint damage , such as erosion , a loss of bone within chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  four  three the joint , and narrowing of joint space .
figure one  nine  .  one  seven
the radiograph ( leave ) and photograph ( right ) show damage to the hand typical of rheumatoid arthritis .
( credit right 
modification of work by " handarmdoc” / flickr )
systemic lupus erythematosus
the damage and pathology of systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) be cause by type iii hypersensitivity reaction .
autoantibody produce in sle be direct against nuclear and cytoplasmic protein .
anti - nuclear antibody ( ana ) be present in more than nine  five % of patient with sle , [ one  six ] with additional autoantibody include antidouble– stranded dna ( ds - dna ) and anti - sm antibody ( antibody to small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ) .
anti - ds - dna and anti - sm antibody be unique to patient with sle  thus , - pron - presence be include in the classification criterion of sle .
cellular interaction with autoantibody lead to nuclear and cellular destruction , with component release after cell death lead to the formation of immune complex .
because autoantibody in sle can target a wide variety of cell , symptom of sle can occur in many body location .
however , the most common symptom include fatigue , fever with no other cause , hair loss , and a sunlight - sensitive " butterfly " or wolf - mask
( lupus ) rash that be find in about five  zero % of people with sle ( figure one  nine  .  one  eight ) .
the rash be most often see over the cheek and bridge of the nose , but can be widespread .
other symptom may appear depend on affect area .
the joint may be affect , lead to arthritis of the finger , hand , wrist , and knee .
effect on the brain and nervous system can lead to headache , numbness , tingling , seizure , vision problem , and personality change .
there may also be abdominal pain , nausea , vomiting , arrhythmias , shortness of breath , and blood in the sputum .
effect on the skin can lead to additional area of skin lesion , and vasoconstriction can cause color change in the finger when - pron - be cold ( raynaud phenomenon ) .
effect on the kidney can lead to edema in the leg and weight gain .
a diagnosis of sle depend on identification of four of one  one of the most common symptom and confirm production of an array of autoantibody unique to sle .
a positive test for ana alone be not diagnostic .
one  six .
c . c . mok , c . s . lau .
“
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus .
" journal of clinical pathology
five  six
no .
seven ( two  zero  zero  three  )  four  eight  one - four  nine  zero .
eight  four  four chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  one  eight
( a ) systemic lupus erythematosus be characterize by autoimmunity to the individual 's own dna and / or protein .
( b )
this patient be present with a butterfly rash , one of the characteristic sign of lupus .
( credit a  modification of work by mikael häggström  credit b  modification of work by shrestha d , dhakal ak , shiva rk , shakya a , shah sc , shakya h )

list the way antibody contribute to the pathogenesis of myasthenia gravi .

explain why rheumatoid arthritis be consider a type iii hypersensitivity .

describe the symptom of systemic lupus erythematosus and explain why - pron - affect so many different part of the body .
 what be recognize as an antigen in myasthenia gravi ?
table one  nine  .  six summarize the cause , sign , and symptom of select autoimmune disease .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  four  five select autoimmune diseases disease cause signs and symptoms addison disease destruction of adrenal gland cell by cytotoxic t cell weakness , nausea , hypotension , fatigue  adrenal crisis with severe pain in abdomen , lower back , and leg  circulatory system collapse , kidney failure celiac disease antibody to gluten
become autoantibody that target cell of the small intestine severe diarrhea , abdominal pain , anemia , malnutrition diabetes mellitus ( type i )
cytotoxic t - cell destruction of the insulinproduce β cell of the pancrea hyperglycemia , extreme increase in thirst and urination , weight loss , extreme fatigue graves disease autoantibodies target thyroid - stimulate hormone receptor , result in overstimulation of the thyroid hyperthyroidism with rapid and irregular heartbeat , heat intolerance , weight loss , goiter , exophthalmia hashimoto thyroiditis thyroid gland be attack by cytotoxic t cell , lymphocyte , macrophage , and autoantibodie thyroiditis with goiter , cold intolerance , muscle weakness , painful and stiff joint , depression , memory loss multiple sclerosis ( ms )
cytotoxic t - cell destruction of the myelin sheath surround nerve axon in the central nervous system visual disturbance , muscle weakness , impair coordination and balance , numbness , prickling or " pin and needle ” sensation ,
impair cognitive function and memory myasthenia gravis autoantibodies direct against acetylcholine receptor within the neuromuscular junction
extreme muscle weakness eventually lead to fatal respiratory arrest psoriasis cytokine activation of keratinocyte cause rapid and excessive epidermal cell turnover itchy or sore patch of thick , red skin with silvery scale  commonly affect elbow , knee , scalp , back , face , palm , foot rheumatoid arthritis autoantibodies , immune complex , complement activation , phagocyte , and t cell damage membrane and bone in joint joint inflammation , pain and disfigurement , chronic systemic inflammation
systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle )
autoantibodies direct against nuclear and cytoplasmic molecule form immune complex that deposit in tissue .
phagocytic cell and complement activation cause tissue damage and inflammation fatigue , fever , joint pain and swelling , hair loss , anemia , clotting , a sunlight - sensitive " butterfly " rash , skin lesion , photosensitivity , decrease kidney function , memory loss , confusion , depression table one  nine  .  six one  nine  .  three organ transplantation and rejection learning objectives
 explain why human leukocyte antigen ( hlas ) be important in tissue transplantation

explain the type of graft possible and - pron - potential for interaction with the immune system
 describe what occur during graft - versus - host disease ( gvhd )
a graft be the transplantation of an organ or tissue to a different location , with the goal of replace a miss or damaged organ or tissue .
graft be typically move without - pron - attachment to the circulatory system and must reestablish these , in addition to the other connection and interaction with - pron - new surround tissue .
there
eight  four  six chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five be different type of graft depend on the source of the new tissue or organ .
tissue that be transplant from one genetically distinct individual to another within the same specie be call allograft .
an interesting variant of the allograft be an isograft , in which tissue from one twin be transplant to another .
as long as the twin be monozygotic ( therefore , essentially genetically identical ) , the transplanted tissue be virtually never reject .
if tissue be transplant from one area on an individual to another area on the same individual ( e . g . , a skin graft on a burn patient ) , - pron - be know as an autograft .
if tissue from an animal be transplant into a human , this be call a xenograft .
transplant rejection
the different type of graft describe above have vary risk for rejection ( table one  nine  .  seven ) .
rejection occur when the recipient 's immune system recognize the donor tissue as foreign ( non - self ) , trigger an immune response .
the major histocompatibility complex marker
mhc i and mhc ii , more specifically identify as human leukocyte antigen ( hlas ) , play a role in transplant rejection .
the hla express in tissue transplant from a genetically different individual or specie may be recognize as non - self molecule by the host 's dendritic cell .
if this occur , the dendritic cell will process and present the foreign hla to the host 's helper t cell and cytotoxic t cell , thereby activate - pron - .
cytotoxic t cell then target and kill the grafted cell through the same mechanism - pron - use to kill virus - infect cell  helper t cell may also release cytokine that activate macrophage to kill graft cell .
type of tissue and organ grafts and - pron - complications graft procedure complications autograft from self to self
no rejection concern isograft from identical twin to twin little concern of rejection allograft from relative or nonrelative to individual rejection possible xenograft
from animal to human rejection possible table one  nine  .  seven with the three highly polymorphic mhc i gene in human ( hla - a , hla - b , and hla - c ) determine compatibility , each with many allele segregate in a population , odd be extremely low that a randomly choose donor will match a recipient ' s six - allele genotype ( the two allele at each locus be express codominantly ) .
this be why a parent or a sibling may be the good donor in many situation - a genetic match between the mhc gene be much more likely and the organ be much less likely to be reject .
although match all of the mhc gene can lower the risk for rejection , there be a number of additional gene product that also play a role in stimulate response against graft tissue .
because of this , no non - self graft tissue be likely to completely avoid rejection .
however , the more similar the mhc gene match , the more likely the graft be to be tolerate for a long time .
most transplant recipient , even those with tissue well match to - pron - mhc gene , require treatment with immunosuppressant drug for the rest of - pron - life .
this can make - pron - more vulnerable than the general population to complication from infectious disease .
- pron - can also result in transplant - relate malignancy because the body 's normal defense against cancer cell be be suppress .

what part of the immune response be responsible for graft rejection ?

explain why blood relative be prefer as organ donor .

describe the role of immunosuppression in transplantation .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  four  seven graft - versus - host disease
a form of rejection call graft - versus - host disease ( gvhd ) primarily occur in recipient of bone marrow transplant and peripheral blood stem cell .
ghvd present a unique situation because the transplanted tissue be capable of produce immune cell  apc in the donate bone marrow may recognize the host cell as non - self , lead to activation of the donor cytotoxic t cell .
once activate , the donor 's t cell attack the recipient cell , cause acute gvhd .
acute gvhd typically develop within week after a bone marrow transplant , cause tissue damage affect the skin , gastrointestinal tract , liver , and eye .
in addition , acute gvhd may also lead to a cytokine storm , an unregulated secretion of cytokine that may be fatal .
in addition to acute gvhd , there be also the risk for chronic gvhd develop month after the bone marrow transplant .
the mechanism responsible for chronic gvhd be not well understand .
to minimize the risk of gvhd , - pron - be critically important to match the hla of the host and donor as closely as possible in bone marrow transplant .
in addition , the donate bone marrow be process before graft to remove as many donor apc and t cell as possible , leave mostly hematopoietic stem cell .

why do gvhd occur in specifically in bone marrow transplant ?

what cell be responsible for gvhd ?
the future of transplantation historically speak , the practice of transplant tissue - and the complication that can accompany such procedure - be a relatively recent development .
- pron - be not until one  nine  five  four that the first successful organ transplantation between two human be achieve .
yet the field of organ transplantation have progress rapidly since that time .
nonetheless , the practice of transplant non - self tissue may soon become obsolete .
scientist be now attempt to develop method by which new organ may be grow in vitro from an individual 's own harvest cell to replace damaged or abnormal one .
because organ produce in this way would contain the individual 's own cell , - pron - could be transplant into the individual without risk for rejection .
an alternative approach that be gain renew research interest be genetic modification of donor animal , such as pig , to provide transplantable organ that do not elicit an immune response in the recipient .
the approach involve excise the gene in the pig ( in the embryo ) that be most responsible for the rejection reaction after transplantation .
find these gene and effectively remove - pron - be a challenge , however .
so too be identify and neutralize risk from viral sequence that may be embed in the pig genome , pose a risk for infection in the human recipient .
there be currently more than a dozen different tissue and organ use in human transplantation .
learn more about - pron - at this ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two organstransp ) website .
link to learn eight  four  eight chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five resolution kerry ' s test come back positive , confirm a diagnosis of lupus , a disease that occur one  zero time more frequently in woman than man .
sle can not be cure , but there be various therapy available for reduce and manage - pron - symptom .
specific therapy be prescribe base on the particular symptom present in the patient .
kerry ' s rheumatologist start - pron - therapy with a low dose of corticosteroid to reduce - pron - rash .
- pron - also prescribe a low dose of hydroxychloroquine , an anti - inflammatory drug that be use to treat inflammation in patient with ra , childhood arthritis , sle , and other autoimmune disease .
although the mechanism of action of hydroxychloroquine be not well define , - pron - appear that this drug interfere with the process of antigen processing and activation of autoimmunity .
because of - pron - mechanism , the effect of hydroxychloroquine be not as immediate as that of other anti - inflammatory drug , but - pron - be still consider a good companion therapy for sle .
kerry 's doctor also advise - pron - to limit - pron - exposure to sunlight , because photosensitivity to sunlight may precipitate rash .
over the next six month , kerry follow - pron - treatment plan and - pron - symptom do not return .
however , future flare - up be likely to occur .
- pron - will need to continue - pron - treatment for the rest of - pron - life and seek medical attention whenever new symptom develop .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
one  nine  .  four
immunodeficiency
learning objectives
 compare the cause of primary and secondary immunodeficiency  describe treatment for primary and secondary immunodeficiency immunodeficiencies be inherit ( primary ) or acquire ( secondary ) disorder in which element of host immune defense be either absent or functionally defective .
in develop country , most immunodeficiency be inherit , and - pron - be usually first see in the clinic as recurrent or overwhelming infection in infant .
however , on a global scale , malnutrition be the most common cause of immunodeficiency and would be categorize as an acquired immunodeficiency .
acquired immunodeficiency be more likely to develop later in life , and the pathogenic mechanism of many remain obscure .
primary immunodeficiency primary immunodeficiency , which number more than two  five  zero , be cause by inherit defect of either nonspecific innate or specific adaptive immune defense .
in general , patient bear with primary immunodeficiency ( pi ) commonly have an increase susceptibility to infection .
this susceptibility can become apparent shortly after birth or in early childhood for some individual , whereas other patient develop symptom later in life .
some primary immunodeficiency be due to a defect of a single cellular or humoral component of the immune system  other may result from defect of more than one component .
example of primary immunodeficiency include chronic granulomatous disease , x - link agammaglobulinemia , selective iga deficiency , and severe combine immunodeficiency disease .
chronic granulomatous disease
the cause of chronic granulomatous disease ( cgd ) be defect in the nadph oxidase system of phagocytic cell , include neutrophil and macrophage , that prevent the production of superoxide radical in phagolysosome .
the inability to produce superoxide radical impair the antibacterial activity of phagocyte .
as a result , infection in clinical focus chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  four  nine patient with cgd persist longer , lead to a chronic local inflammation call a granuloma .
microorganism that be the most common cause of infection in patient with cgd include aspergillus spp .
, staphylococcus aureus , chromobacterium violaceum , serratia marcescen , and salmonella typhimurium .
x - link agammaglobulinemia deficiencies in b cell due to defective differentiation lead to a lack of specific antibody production know as x - link agammaglobulinemia .
in one  nine  five  two , ogden c . bruton ( one  nine  zero  eight – two  zero  zero  three ) describe the first immunodeficiency in a boy whose immune system fail to produce antibody .
this defect be inherit on the x chromosome and be characterize by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum  - pron - be call bruton x - link agammaglobulinemia ( xla ) .
the defective gene , btk , in xla be now know to encode a tyrosine kinase call bruton tyrosine kinase ( btk ) .
in patient whose b cell be unable to produce sufficient amount of btk , the b - cell maturation and differentiation halt at the pre - b - cell stage of growth .
b - cell maturation and differentiation beyond the pre - bcell stage of growth be require for immunoglobulin production .
patient who lack antibody production suffer from recurrent infection almost exclusively due to extracellular pathogen that cause pyogenic infection 
haemophilus influenzae , streptococcus pneumoniae , s . pyogene , and s . aureus .
because cell - mediate immunity be not impair , these patient be not particularly vulnerable to infection cause by virus or intracellular pathogen .
selective iga deficiency
the most common inherit form of immunoglobulin deficiency be selective iga deficiency , affect about one in eight  zero  zero people .
individual with selective iga deficiency produce normal level of igg and igm , but be not able to produce secretory iga . iga deficiency predispose these individual to lung and gastrointestinal infection for which secretory iga be normally an important defense mechanism .
infection in the lung and gastrointestinal tract can involve a variety of pathogen , include h . influenzae , s . pneumoniae , moraxella catarrhalis , s . aureus , giardia lamblia , or pathogenic strain of escherichia coli .
severe combined immunodeficiency patients who suffer from severe combine immunodeficiency ( scid ) have b - cell and t - cell defect that impair t - cell dependent antibody response as well as cell - mediate immune response .
patient with scid also can not develop immunological memory , so vaccine provide - pron - no protection , and live attenuated vaccine ( e . g . , for varicella - zoster , measle virus , rotavirus , poliovirus ) can actually cause the infection - pron - be intend to prevent .
the most common form be x - link scid , which account for nearly five  zero % of all case and occur primarily in male .
patient with scid be typically diagnose within the first few month of life after develop severe , often lifethreatene , opportunistic infection by candida spp .
, pneumocystis jirovecii , or pathogenic strain of e . coli .
without treatment , baby with scid do not typically survive infancy .
in some case , a bone marrow transplant may successfully correct the defect in lymphocyte development that lead to the scid phenotype , by replace the defective component .
however , this treatment approach be not without risk , as demonstrate by the famous case of david vetter ( one  nine  seven  one – one  nine  eight  four ) , better know as
" bubble boy
" ( figure one  nine  .  one  nine ) .
vetter , a patient with scid who live in a protective plastic bubble to prevent exposure to opportunistic microbe , receive a bone marrow transplant from - pron - sister .
because of a latent epstein - barr virus infection in - pron - bone marrow , however , - pron - develop mononucleosis and die of burkitt lymphoma at the age of one  two year .
eight  five  zero chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure one  nine  .  one  nine david vetter , popularly know as "
the bubble boy , " be bear with scid and live most of - pron - life isolate inside a plastic bubble .
here - pron - be show outside the bubble in a suit specially build for - pron - by nasa .
( credit  nasa johnson space center )

what be the fundamental cause of a primary immunodeficiency ?

explain why patient with chronic granulomatous disease be especially susceptible to bacterial infection .

explain why individual with selective iga deficiency be susceptible to respiratory and gastrointestinal infection .
secondary immunodeficiency
a secondary immunodeficiency occur as a result an acquire impairment of function of b cell , t cell , or both .
secondary immunodeficiency can be cause by 
 systemic disorder such as diabetes mellitus , malnutrition , hepatitis , or hiv infection  immunosuppressive treatment such as cytotoxic chemotherapy , bone marrow ablation before transplantation , or radiation therapy 
prolonged critical illness due to infection , surgery , or trauma in the very young , elderly , or hospitalize patient unlike primary immunodeficiency , which have a genetic basis , secondary immunodeficiency be often reversible if the underlie cause be resolve .
patient with secondary immunodeficiency develop an increased susceptibility to an otherwise benign infection by opportunistic pathogen such as candida spp .
, p . jirovecii , and cryptosporidium .
hiv infection and the associate acquire immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) be the best - know secondary immunodeficiency .
aids be characterize by profound cd four t - cell lymphopenia ( decrease in lymphocyte ) .
the decrease in cd four t cell be the result of various mechanism , include hiv - induce pyroptosis ( a type of apoptosis that stimulate an inflammatory response ) , viral cytopathic effect , and cytotoxicity to hiv - infect cell .
the most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency worldwide be severe malnutrition , which affect both innate and adaptive immunity .
more research and information be need for the more common cause of secondary immunodeficiency  however , the number of new discovery in aids research far exceed that of any other single chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  five  one cause of secondary immunodeficiency .
aids research have pay off extremely well in term of discovery and treatment  increase research into the most common cause of immunodeficiency , malnutrition , would likely be as beneficial .

what be the most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency ?

explain why secondary immunodeficiency can sometimes be reverse .
an immunocompromised host benjamin , a five  zero  - year - old male patient who have be receive chemotherapy to treat - pron - chronic myelogenous leukemia ( cml ) , a disease characterize by massive overproduction of nonfunctional , malignant myelocytic leukocyte that crowd out other , healthy leukocyte , be see in the emergency department .
- pron - be complain of a productive , wet cough , dyspnea , and fatigue .
on examination , - pron - pulse be one  two  zero beat per minute ( bpm ) ( normal range be six  zero – one  zero  zero bpm ) and weak , and - pron - blood pressure be nine  zero  /  six  zero mm hg
( normal be one  two  zero  /  eight  zero mm hg ) .
during auscultation , a distinct crackling can be hear in - pron - lung as - pron - breathe , and - pron - pulse - oximeter level ( a measurement of blood - oxygen saturation ) be eight  zero % ( normal be nine  five %– one  zero  zero % ) .
- pron - have a fever  - pron - temperature be three  eight  .  nine ° c ( one  zero  two ° f ) .
sputum culture and blood sample be obtain and send to the lab , but benjamin go into respiratory distress and die before the result can be obtain .
benjamin 's death be a result of a combination of - pron - immune system be compromise by - pron - leukemia and - pron - chemotherapy treatment further weaken - pron - ability to mount an immune response .
cml ( and leukemia in general )
and correspond chemotherapy cause a decrease in the number of leukocyte capable of normal function , lead to secondary immunodeficiency .
this increase the risk for opportunistic bacterial , viral , protozoal , and fungal infection that could include staphylococcus , enterovirus , pneumocystis , giardia , or candida .
benjamin 's symptom be suggestive of bacterial pneumonia , but - pron - leukemia and chemotherapy likely complicate and contribute to the severity of the pneumonia , result in - pron - death .
because - pron - leukemia be overproduce certain white blood cell , and those overproduce white blood cell be largely nonfunctional or abnormal in - pron - function , - pron - do not have the proper immune system blood cell to help - pron - fight off the infection .
table one  nine  .  eight summarize primary and secondary immunodeficiency , - pron - effect on immune function , and typical outcome .
primary and secondary immunodeficiencies disease effect on
immune function outcomes chronic granulomatous disease impair killing of bacteria within the phagolysosome of neutrophil and macrophage chronic infection and granuloma primary immunodeficiency selective iga deficiency inability to produce secretory iga predisposition to lung and gastrointestinal infection table one  nine  .  eight case in point eight  five  two chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five primary and secondary immunodeficiencies disease effect on immune function outcomes severe combined immunodeficiency disease ( scid )
deficient humoral and cellmediate immune response early development of severe and life - threaten opportunistic infection x - link agammaglobulinemia flawed differentiation of b cell and absence of specific antibody recurrent infection almost exclusively due to pathogen that cause pyogenic infection immunosuppressive therapy ( e . g . , chemotherapy , radiotherapy )
impair humoral and / or
cellmediate immune response opportunistic infection , rare cancer malnutrition impair
humoral and / or
cellmediate immune response opportunistic infection , rare cancer secondary immunodeficiency viral infection ( e . g . , hiv ) impair cell - mediate immune response due to cd four t - cell lymphopenia opportunistic infection , rare cancer table one  nine  .  eight one  nine  .  five cancer immunobiology and immunotherapy
learning objectives
 explain how the adaptive specific immune response respond to tumor  discuss the risk and benefit of tumor vaccine
cancer involve a loss of the ability of cell to control - pron - cell cycle , the stage each eukaryotic cell go through as - pron - grow and then divide .
when this control be lose , the affect cell rapidly divide and often lose the ability to differentiate into the cell type appropriate for - pron - location in the body .
in addition , - pron - lose contact inhibition and can start to grow on top of each other .
this can result in formation of a tumor .
- pron - be important to make a distinction here  the term " cancer " be use to describe the disease result from loss of cell - cycle regulation and subsequent cell proliferation .
but the term " tumor " be more general .
a “ tumor " be an abnormal mass of cell , and a tumor can be benign ( not cancerous ) or malignant ( cancerous ) .
traditional cancer treatment use radiation and / or chemotherapy to destroy cancer cell  however , these treatment can have unwanted side effect because - pron - harm normal cell as well as cancer cell .
newer , promise therapy attempt to enlist the patient 's immune system to target cancer cell specifically .
- pron - be know that the immune system can recognize and destroy cancerous cell , and some researcher and immunologist also believe , base on the result of - pron - experiment , that many cancer be eliminate by the body 's own defense before - pron - can become a health problem .
this idea be not universally accept by researcher , however , and need further investigation for verification .
cell - mediated response to tumors cell - mediate immune response can be direct against cancer cell , many of which do not have the normal complement of self - protein , make - pron - a target for elimination .
abnormal cancer cell may also present tumor antigen .
these tumor antigen be not a part of the screening process use to eliminate lymphocyte during development  thus , even though - pron - be self - antigen , - pron - can stimulate and drive adaptive immune response against abnormal cell .
chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system
eight  five  three presentation of tumor antigen can stimulate naïve helper t cell to become activate by cytokine such as il -  one  two and differentiate into th one cell .
th one cell release cytokine that can activate natural killer ( nk ) cell and enhance the killing of activate cytotoxic t cell .
both nk cell and cytotoxic t cell can recognize and target cancer cell , and induce apoptosis through the action of perforin and granzyme .
in addition , activate cytotoxic t cell can bind to cell - surface protein on abnormal cell and induce apoptosis by a second kill mechanism call the cd nine  five ( fas ) cytotoxic pathway .
despite these mechanism for remove cancerous cell from the body , cancer remain a common cause of death .
unfortunately , malignant tumor tend to actively suppress the immune response in various way .
in some cancer , the immune cell - pron - be cancerous .
in leukemia , lymphocyte that would normally facilitate the immune response become abnormal .
in other cancer , the cancerous cell can become resistant to induction of apoptosis .
this may occur through the expression of membrane protein that shut off cytotoxic t cell or that induce regulatory t cell that can shut down immune response .
the mechanism by which cancer cell alter immune response be still not yet fully understand , and this be a very active area of research .
as scientist ' understanding of adaptive immunity improve , cancer therapy that harness the body
's immune defense may someday be more successful in treat and eliminate cancer .

how do cancer cell suppress the immune system ?

describe how the immune system recognize and destroy cancer cell .
cancer vaccines
there be two type of cancer vaccine  preventive and therapeutic .
preventive vaccine be use to prevent cancer from occur , whereas therapeutic vaccine be use to treat patient with cancer .
most preventive cancer vaccine target viral infection that be know to lead to cancer .
these include vaccine against human papillomavirus ( hpv ) and hepatitis b , which help prevent cervical and liver cancer , respectively .
most therapeutic cancer vaccine be in the experimental stage .
- pron - exploit tumor - specific antigen to stimulate the immune system to selectively attack cancer cell .
specifically , - pron - aim to enhance th one function and interaction with cytotoxic t cell , which , in turn , result in more effective attack on abnormal tumor cell .
in some case , researcher have use genetic engineering to develop antitumor vaccine in an approach similar to that use for dna vaccine ( see micro connections  dna vaccine ) .
the vaccine contain a recombinant plasmid with gene for tumor antigen  theoretically , the tumor gene would not induce new cancer because - pron - be not functional , but - pron - could trick the immune system into target the tumor gene product as a foreign invader .
the first fda - approve therapeutic cancer vaccine be sipuleucel - t ( provenge ) , approve in two  zero  one  zero to treat certain case of prostate cancer . [ one  seven ]
this unconventional vaccine be custom design use the patient 's own cell .
apc be remove from the patient and culture with a tumor - specific molecule  the cell be then return to the patient .
this approach appear to enhance the patient 's immune response against the cancer cell .
another therapeutic cancer vaccine ( talimogene laherparepvec , also call t - vec or imlygic ) be approve by the fda in two  zero  one  five for treatment of melanoma , a form of skin cancer .
this vaccine contain a virus that be inject into tumor , where - pron - infect and lyse the tumor cell .
the virus also induce a response in lesion or tumor besides those into which the vaccine be inject , indicate that - pron - be stimulate a more general ( as oppose to local ) antitumor immune response in the patient .
one  seven .
national institutes of health , national cancer institute .
"
cancer vaccines .
"
http / / www . cancer . gov / about - cancer / causes - prevention / vaccine - fact - sheet#q eight .
access on may two  zero , two  zero  one  six .
eight  five  four chapter one  nine
 diseases of the immune system
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 explain the difference between preventative and therapeutic cancer vaccine .

describe at least two different approach to develop therapeutic anti - cancer vaccine .
use viruses to
cure cancer viruses typically destroy the cell - pron - infect - a fact responsible for any number of human disease .
but the cell - kill power of virus may yet prove to be the cure for some type of cancer , which be generally treat by attempt to rid the body of cancerous cell .
several clinical trial be study the effect of virus target at cancer cell .
reolysin , a drug currently in testing phase , use reovirus ( respiratory enteric orphan virus ) that can infect and kill cell that have an activate ras - signal pathway , a common mutation in cancerous cell .
virus such as rubeola ( the measle virus ) can also be genetically engineer to aggressively attack tumor cell .
these modify virus not only bind more specifically to receptor overexpresse on cancer cell , - pron - also carry gene drive by promoter that be only turn on within cancer cell .
herpesvirus and other have also be modify in this way .
summary one  nine  .  one hypersensitivities

an allergy be an adaptive immune response , sometimes life - threaten , to an allergen .

type i hypersensitivity require sensitization of mast cell with ige , involve an initial ige antibody response and ige attachment to mast cell .
on second exposure to an allergen , cross - linking of ige molecule on mast cell trigger degranulation and release of preformed and newly form chemical mediator of inflammation .
type i hypersensitivity may be localize and relatively minor ( hive and hay fever ) or systemwide and dangerous ( systemic anaphylaxis ) .
 type ii hypersensitivity result from antibody bind to antigen on cell and initiate cytotoxic response .
example include hemolytic transfusion reaction and hemolytic disease of the newborn .

type iii hypersensitivity result from formation and accumulation of immune complex in tissue , stimulate damage inflammatory response .
 type iv hypersensitivity be not mediate by antibody , but by helper t - cell activation of macrophage , eosinophil , and cytotoxic t cell .
one  nine  .  two autoimmune disorders
 autoimmune disease result from a breakdown in immunological tolerance .
the actual induction event ( s ) for autoimmune state be largely unknown .

some autoimmune disease attack specific organ , whereas other be more systemic .
 organ - specific autoimmune disease include celiac disease , grave disease , hashimoto thyroiditis , type i diabetes mellitus , and addison disease .
 systemic autoimmune disease include multiple sclerosis , myasthenia gravi , psoriasis , rheumatoid arthritis , and systemic lupus erythematosus .

treatment for autoimmune disease generally involve anti - inflammatory and immunosuppressive drug .
one  nine  .  three organ transplantation and rejection 
grafts and transplant can be classify as autograft , isograft , allograft , or xenograft base on the micro connections chapter one  nine  diseases of the immune system eight  five  five genetic difference between the donor 's and recipient 's tissue .
 genetic difference , especially among the mhc ( hla ) gene , will dictate the likelihood that rejection of the transplanted tissue will occur .

transplant recipient usually require immunosuppressive therapy to avoid rejection , even with good genetic matching .
this can create additional problem when immune response be need to fight off infectious agent and prevent cancer .

graft - versus - host disease can occur in bone marrow transplant , as the mature t cell in the transplant - pron - recognize the recipient 's tissue as foreign .

transplantation method and technology have improve greatly in recent decade and may move into new area with the use of stem cell technology to avoid the need for genetic matching of mhc molecule .
one  nine  .  four
immunodeficiency 
primary immunodeficiency be cause by genetic abnormality  secondary immunodeficiency be acquire through disease , diet , or environmental exposure 
primary immunodeficiency may result from flaw in phagocyte killing of innate immunity , or impairment of t cell and b cell .
 primary immunodeficiency include chronic granulomatous disease , x - link agammaglobulinemia , selective iga deficiency , and severe combine immunodeficiency disease .

secondary immunodeficiency result from environmentally induce defect in b cell and / or t cell .

causes for secondary immunodeficiency include malnutrition , viral infection , diabetes , prolonged infection , and chemical or radiation exposure .
one  nine  .  five cancer immunobiology and immunotherapy

cancer result from a loss of control of the cell cycle , result in uncontrolled cell proliferation and a loss of the ability to differentiate .

adaptive and innate immune response be engage by tumor antigen , self - molecule only find on abnormal cell .
these adaptive response stimulate helper t cell to activate cytotoxic t cell and nk cell of innate immunity that will seek and destroy cancer cell .

new anticancer therapy be in development that will exploit natural adaptive immunity anticancer response .
these include external stimulation of cytotoxic t cell and therapeutic vaccine that assist or enhance the immune response .
chapter two  zero laboratory analysis of the immune response figure two  zero  .  one lab - on - a - chip technology allow immunological assay to be miniaturize so test can be do rapidly with minimum quantity of expensive reagent .
the chip contain tiny flow tube to allow movement of fluid by capillary action , reaction site with embed reagent , and datum output through electronic sensor .
( credit  modification of work by maggie bartlett , nhgri )
chapter outline
two  zero  .  one polyclonal and monoclonal antibody production two  zero  .  two
detecting
antigen - antibody complexe two  zero  .  three agglutination assay two  zero  .  four eia and elisas two  zero  .  five
fluorescent antibody techniques introduction
many laboratory test be design to confirm a presumptive diagnosis by detect antibody specific to a suspect pathogen .
unfortunately , many such test be time - consume and expensive .
that be now change , however , with the development of new , miniaturize technology that be fast and inexpensive .
for example , researcher at columbia university be develop a " lab - on - a - chip " technology that will test a single drop of blood for one  five different infectious disease , include hiv and syphilis , in a matter of minutes . [ one ]
the blood be pull through tiny capillary into reaction chamber where the patient 's antibody mix with reagent .
a chip reader that attach to a cell phone analyze the result and send - pron - to the patient 's healthcare provider .
currently the device be be field test in rwanda to check pregnant woman for chronic disease .
researcher estimate that the chip reader will sell for about $ one  zero  zero and individual chip for $ one  . [ two ] one .
chin , curtis d . et al . , “ mobile device for disease diagnosis and data tracking in resource - limited settings , " clinical chemistry five  nine , no . four ( two  zero  one  three )  six  two  nine - four  zero .
chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  five  nine two  zero  .  one polyclonal and monoclonal antibody production learning objectives
 compare the method of development , use , and characteristic of monoclonal and polyclonal antibody 
explain the nature of antibody cross - reactivity and why this be less of a problem with monoclonal antibody
in addition to be crucial for - pron - normal immune response , antibody provide powerful tool for research and diagnostic purpose .
the high specificity of antibody make - pron - an excellent tool for detect and quantify a broad array of target , from drug to serum protein to microorganism .
with in vitro assay , antibody can be use to precipitate soluble antigen , agglutinate ( clump ) cell , opsonize and kill bacteria with the assistance of complement , and neutralize drug , toxin , and virus .
an antibody 's specificity result from the antigen - bind site form within the variable region - region of the antibody that have unique pattern of amino acid that can only bind to target antigen with a molecular sequence that provide complementary charge and noncovalent bond .
there be limitation to antibody specificity , however .
some antigen be so chemically similar that cross - reactivity occur  in other word , antibody raise against one antigen bind to a chemically similar but different antigen .
consider an antigen that consist of a single protein with multiple epitope ( figure two  zero  .  two ) .
this single protein may stimulate the production of many different antibody , some of which may bind to chemically identical epitope on other protein .
cross - reactivity be more likely to occur between antibody and antigen that have low affinity or avidity .
affinity , which can be determine experimentally , be a measure of the bind strength between an antibody ' s bind site and an epitope , whereas avidity be the total strength of all the interaction in an antibody - antigen complex ( which may have more than one bonding site ) .
avidity be influence by affinity as well as the structural arrangement of the epitope and the variable region of the antibody .
if an antibody have a high affinity / avidity for a specific antigen , - pron - be less likely to cross - react with an antigen for which - pron - have a low affinity / avidity .
part one
in an unfortunate incident , a healthcare worker struggle with addiction be catch steal syrinx of painkiller and replace - pron - with syrinx fill with unknown substance .
the hospital immediately fire the employee and have - pron - arrest  however , two patient that - pron - have work with later test positive for hiv .
while there be no proof that the infection originate from the tainted syrinx , the hospital 's public health physician take immediate step to determine whether any other patient have be put at risk .
although the worker have only be employ for a short time , - pron - be determine that - pron - have come into contact with more than one  three  zero  zero patient .
the hospital decide to contact all of these patient and have - pron - test for hiv .

why do the hospital feel - pron - be necessary to test every patient for hiv ?

what type of test can be use to determine if a patient have hiv ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus two .
evarts , h . , “
fast , low - cost device use the cloud to speed up testing for hiv and more , " january two  four , two  zero  one  three .
accessed july one  four , two  zero  one  six .
http / / engineering . columbia . edu / fast - low - cost - device - uses - cloud - speed - diagnostic - testing - hiv - and - more .
eight  six  zero chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two
an antibody bind to a specific region on an antigen call an epitope .
a single antigen can have multiple epitope for different , specific antibody .

what property make antibody useful for research and clinical diagnosis ?

what be cross - reactivity and why do - pron - occur ?
produce polyclonal antibodies antibodies use for research and diagnostic purpose be often obtain by inject a lab animal such as a rabbit or a goat with a specific antigen .
within a few week , the animal 's immune system will produce high level of antibody specific for the antigen .
these antibody can be harvest in an antiserum , which be whole serum collect from an animal follow exposure to an antigen .
because most antigen be complex structure with multiple epitope , - pron - result in the production of multiple antibody in the lab animal .
this so - call polyclonal antibody response be also typical of the response to infection by the human immune system .
antiserum draw from an animal will thus contain antibody from multiple clone of b cell , with each b cell respond to a specific epitope on the antigen ( figure two  zero  .  three ) .
lab animal be usually inject at least twice with antigen when be use to produce antiserum .
the second injection will activate memory cell that make class igg antibody against the antigen .
the memory cell also undergo affinity maturation , result in a pool of antibody with high average affinity .
affinity maturation occur because of mutation in the immunoglobulin gene variable region , result in b cell with slightly alter antigenbinde site .
on re - exposure to the antigen , those b cell capable of produce antibody with high affinity antigenbinde site will be stimulate to proliferate and produce more antibody than - pron - low - affinity peer .
an adjuvant , which be a chemical that provoke a generalize activation of the immune system that stimulate great antibody production , be often mix with the antigen prior to injection .
antiserum obtain from animal will not only contain antibody against the antigen artificially introduce in the laboratory , but - pron - will also contain antibody to any other antigen to which the animal have be expose during - pron - lifetime .
for this reason , antisera must first be " purify " to remove other antibody before use the antibody for research or diagnostic assay .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  six  one figure two  zero  .  three
this diagram illustrate the process for harvest polyclonal antibody produce in response to an antigen .
clinical uses of polyclonal antisera polyclonal antisera be use in many clinical test that be design to determine whether a patient be produce antibody in response to a particular pathogen .
while these test be certainly powerful diagnostic tool , - pron - have - pron - limitation , because - pron - be an indirect mean of determine whether a particular pathogen be present .
test base on a polyclonal response can sometimes lead to a false - positive result - in other word , a test that confirm the presence of an antigen that be , in fact , not present .
antibody - base test can also result in a false - negative result , which occur when the test fail to detect an antibody that be , in fact , present .
the accuracy of antibody test can be describe in term of test sensitivity and test specificity .
test sensitivity be the probability of get a positive test result when the patient be indeed infect .
if a test have high sensitivity , the probability of a false negative be low .
test specificity , on the other hand , be the probability of get a negative test result when the patient be not infect .
if a test have high specificity , the probability of a false positive be low .
false positive often occur due to cross - reactivity , which can occur when epitope from a different pathogen be similar to those find on the pathogen be test for .
for this reason , antibody - base test be often use only as screening test  if the result be positive , other confirmatory test be use to make sure that the result be not a false positive .
for example , a blood sample from a patient suspect of have hepatitis c can be screen for the virus use antibody that bind to antigen on hepatitis c virus .
if the patient be indeed infect with hepatitis c virus , the antibody will bind to the antigen , yield a positive test result .
if the patient be not infect with hepatitic c virus , the antibody will generally not bind to anything and the test should be negative  however , a false positive may occur if the patient have be previously infect by any of a variety of pathogen that elicit antibody that crossreact with the hepatitis c virus antigen .
antibody test for hepatitis c have high sensitivity ( a low probability of a false negative ) but low specificity ( a high probability of a false positive ) .
thus , patient who test positive must have a second , confirmatory test to rule out the possibility of a false positive .
the confirmatory test be a more expensive and time - consume test that directly test for the presence of hepatitis c viral rna in the blood .
only after the confirmatory test come back positive can the patient be definitively diagnose with a hepatitis c infection .
antibody - base test can result in a false negative if , for any reason , the patient 's immune system have not produce eight  six  two chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five detectable level of antibody .
for some disease , - pron - may take several week follow infection before the immune system produce enough antibody to cross the detection threshold of the assay .
in immunocompromised patient , the immune system may not be capable of produce a detectable level of antibody .
another limitation of use antibody production as an indicator of disease be that antibody in the blood will persist long after the infection have be clear .
depend on the type of infection , antibody will be present for many month  sometimes , - pron - may be present for the remainder of the patient 's life .
thus , a positive antibody - base test only mean that the patient be infect at some point in time  - pron - do not prove that the infection be active .
in addition to - pron - role in diagnosis , polyclonal antisera can activate complement , detect the presence of bacteria in clinical and food industry setting , and perform a wide array of precipitation reaction that can detect and quantify serum protein , virus , or other antigen .
however , with the many specificity of antibody present in a polyclonal antiserum , there be a significant likelihood that the antiserum will cross - react with antigen to which the individual be never expose .
therefore , - pron - must always account for the possibility of false - positive result when work with a polyclonal antiserum .

what be a false positive and what be some reason that false positive occur ?

what be a false negative and what be some reason that false positive occur ?

if a patient test negative on a highly sensitive test , what be the likelihood that the person be infect with the pathogen ?
produce monoclonal antibodies
some type of assay require well antibody specificity and affinity than can be obtain use a polyclonal antiserum .
to attain this high specificity , all of the antibody must bind with high affinity to a single epitope .
this high specificity can be provide by monoclonal antibody ( mab ) .
table two  zero  .  one compare some of the important characteristic of monoclonal and polyclonal antibody .
unlike polyclonal antibody , which be produce in live animal , monoclonal antibody be produce in vitro use tissue - culture technique .
mab be produce by immunize an animal , often a mouse , multiple time with a specific antigen .
b cell from the spleen of the immunized animal be then remove .
since normal b cell be unable to proliferate forever , - pron - be fuse with immortal , cancerous b cell call myeloma cell , to yield hybridoma cell .
all of the cell be then place in a selective medium that allow only the hybridoma to grow  unfused myeloma cell can not grow , and any unfused b cell die off .
the hybridomas , which be capable of grow continuously in culture while produce antibody , be then screen for the desire mab .
those produce the desire mab be grow in tissue culture  the culture medium be harvest periodically and mab be purify from the medium .
this be a very expensive and time - consume process .
- pron - may take week of culturing and many liter of medium to provide enough mabs for an experiment or to treat a single patient .
mab be expensive ( figure two  zero  .  four ) .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  six  three figure two  zero  .  four monoclonal antibody ( mab ) be produce by introduce an antigen to a mouse and then fuse polyclonal b cell from the mouse 's spleen to myeloma cell .
the result hybridoma cell be culture and continue to produce antibody to the antigen .
hybridomas produce the desire mab be then grow in large number on a selective medium that be periodically harvest to obtain the desire mabs .
characteristic of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies monoclonal antibodies
polyclonal antibodies expensive production inexpensive production
long production time rapid production large quantity of specific antibody
large quantity of nonspecific antibody recognize a single epitope on an antigen recognize multiple epitope on an antigen production be continuous and uniform once the hybridoma be make different batch vary in composition table two  zero  .  one eight  six  four chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five clinical uses of monoclonal antibodies since the most common method for produce monoclonal antibody use mouse cell , - pron - be necessary to create humanized monoclonal antibody for human clinical use .
mouse antibody can not be inject repeatedly into human , because the immune system will recognize - pron - as be foreign and will respond to - pron - with neutralize antibody .
this problem can be minimize by genetically engineer the antibody in the mouse b cell .
the variable region of the mouse light and heavy chain gene be ligate to human constant region , and the chimeric gene be then transfer into a host cell .
this allow production of a mab that be mostly " human " with only the antigen - bind site being of mouse origin .
humanized mab have be successfully use to treat cancer with minimal side effect .
for example , the humanized monoclonal antibody drug herceptin have be helpful for the treatment of some type of breast cancer .
there have also be a few preliminary trial of humanized mab for the treatment of infectious disease , but none of these treatment be currently in use .
in some case , mab have prove too specific to treat infectious disease , because - pron - recognize some serovar of a pathogen but not other .
use a cocktail of multiple mabs that target different strain of the pathogen can address this problem .
however , the great cost associate with mab production be another challenge that have prevent mabs from become practical for use in treat microbial infections . [ three ]
one promise technology for inexpensive mabs be the use of genetically engineer plant to produce antibody ( or plantibodie ) .
this technology transform plant cell into antibody factory rather than rely on tissue culture cell , which be expensive and technically demanding .
in some case , - pron - may even be possible to deliver these antibody by have patient eat the plant rather than by extract and inject the antibody .
for example , in two  zero  one  three , a research group clone antibody gene into plant that have the ability to neutralize an important toxin from bacteria that can cause severe gastrointestinal disease . [ four ] eat the plant could potentially deliver the antibody directly to the toxin .
 how be humanized monoclonal antibody produce ?

what do the " monoclonal " of monoclonal antibody mean ?
use monoclonal antibodies to combat ebola
during the two  zero  one  four – two  zero  one  five ebola outbreak in west africa , a few ebola - infect patient be treat with zmapp , a drug that have be show to be effective in trial do in rhesus macaque
only a few month before . [ five ]
zmapp be a combination of three mabs produce by incorporate the antibody gene into tobacco plant use a viral vector .
by use three mab , the drug be effective across multiple strain of the virus .
unfortunately , there be only enough zmapp to treat a tiny number of patient .
while the current technology be not adequate for produce large quantity of zmapp , - pron - do show that plantibodie - plant - produce mabs - be feasible for clinical use , potentially cost effective , and worth further development .
the last several year have see an explosion in the number of new mab - base drug for the treatment of cancer and infectious disease  however , the widespread use of such drug be currently inhibit by - pron - exorbitant cost , especially in underdeveloped part of the world , where a single dose may cost more than the patient 's lifetime income .
develop method for clone antibody gene into plant could reduce micro connections three .
saylor , carolyn , ekaterina dadachova and arturo casadevall , “ monoclonal antibody - based therapies for microbial diseases , " vaccine two  seven ( two  zero  zero  nine )  g three  eight  - g four  six . four .
nakanishi , katsuhiro et al .
, “ production of hybrid - igg / iga plantibodies with neutralizing activity against shiga toxin one ,
" plos one eight , no .
one  one ( two  zero  one  three ) 
e eight  zero  seven  one  two .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  six  five cost dramatically .
two  zero  .  two
detecting antigen - antibody complexes learning objectives
 describe various type of assay use to find antigen - antibody complex
 describe the circumstance under which antigen - antibody complex precipitate out of solution
 explain how antibody in patient serum can be use to diagnose disease laboratory test to detect antibody and antigen outside of the body ( e . g . , in a test tube ) be call in vitro assay .
when both antibody and - pron - correspond antigen be present in a solution , - pron - can often observe a precipitation reaction in which large complex ( lattice ) form and settle out of solution .
in the next several section , - pron - will discuss several common in vitro assays .
precipitin reactions
a visible antigen - antibody complex be call a precipitin , and in vitro assay that produce a precipitin be call precipitin reaction .
a precipitin reaction typically involve add soluble antigen to a test tube contain a solution of antibody .
each antibody have two arm , each of which can bind to an epitope .
when an antibody bind to two antigen , the two antigen become bind together by the antibody .
a lattice can form as antibody bind more and more antigen together , result in a precipitin ( figure two  zero  .  five ) .
most precipitin test use a polyclonal antiserum rather than monoclonal antibody because polyclonal antibody can bind to multiple epitope , make lattice formation more likely .
although mabs may bind some antigen , the binding will occur less often , make - pron - much less likely that a visible precipitin will form .
figure two  zero  .  five polyclonal antiserum bind to multiple epitope on an antigen , lead to lattice formation that result in a visible precipitin .
monoclonal antibody can only bind to a single epitope  therefore , less binding occur and lattice formation generally do not occur .
the amount of precipitation also depend on several other factor .
for example , precipitation be enhance when the antibody have a high affinity for the antigen .
while most antibody bind antigen with high affinity , even highaffinity bind use relatively weak noncovalent bond , so that individual interaction will often break and new interaction will occur .
in addition , for precipitin formation to be visible , there must be an optimal ratio of antibody to antigen .
the optimal five .
qiu ,
xiangguo et al .
, “ reversion of advanced ebola virus disease in nonhuman primates with zmapp ,
" nature five  one  four ( two  zero  one  four )  four  seven – five  three .
eight  six  six chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five ratio be not likely to be a one   one antigen - to - antibody ratio  - pron - can vary dramatically , depend on the number of epitope on the antigen and the class of antibody .
some antigen may have only one or two epitope recognize by the antiserum , whereas other antigen may have many different epitope and / or multiple instance of the same epitope on a single antigen molecule .
figure two  zero  .  six illustrate how the ratio of antigen and antibody affect the amount of precipitation .
to achieve the optimal ratio , antigen be slowly add to a solution contain antibody , and the amount of precipitin be determine qualitatively .
initially , there be not enough antigen to produce visible lattice formation  this be call the zone of antibody excess .
as more antigen be add , the reaction enter the equivalence zone ( or zone of equivalence ) , where both the optimal antigen - antibody interaction and maximal precipitation occur .
if even more antigen be add , the amount of antigen would become excessive and actually cause the amount of precipitation to decline .
figure two  zero  .  six
as antigen be slowly add to a solution contain a constant amount antibody , the amount of precipitin increase as the antibody - to - antigen ratio approach the equivalence zone and decrease once the proportion of antigen exceed the optimal ratio .

what be a precipitin ?

why do polyclonal antisera produce a well precipitin reaction ?
precipitin
ring test
a variety of technique allow - pron - to use precipitin formation to quantify either antigen concentration or the amount of antibody present in an antiserum .
one such technique be the precipitin ring test ( figure two  zero  .  seven ) , which be use to determine the relative amount of antigen - specific antibody in a sample of serum .
to perform this test , a set of test tube be prepare by add an antigen solution to the bottom of each tube .
each tube receive the same volume of solution , and the concentration of antigen be constant ( e . g . , one mg / ml ) .
next , glycerol be add to the antigen solution in each test tube , follow by a serial dilution of the antiserum .
the glycerol prevent mix of the antiserum with the antigen solution , allow antigen - antibody bind to take place only at the interface of the two solution .
the result be a visible ring of precipitin in the tube that have an antigen - antibody ratio within the equivalence zone .
this chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  six  seven high dilution with a visible ring be use to determine the titer of the antibody .
the titer be the reciprocal of the high dilution show a positive result , express as a whole number .
in figure two  zero  .  seven , the titer be one  six .
while a measurement of titer do not tell - pron - in absolute term how much antibody be present , - pron - do give a measure of biological activity , which be often more important than absolute amount .
in this example , - pron - would not be useful to know what mass of igg be present in the antiserum , because there be many different specificity of antibody present  but - pron - be important for - pron - to know how much of the antibody activity in a patient 's serum be direct against the antigen of interest ( e . g . , a particular pathogen or allergen ) .
figure two  zero  .  seven
a precipitin ring test be perform use a standard antigen solution in the bottom of the tube and a serial dilution of antiserum in the top of the tube .
glycerol prevent the two solution from mix so that precipitation only occur at the interface .
a visible ring of precipitation be see in the one  /  four , one  /  eight , and one  /  one  six dilution , indicate that these concentration be within the equivalence zone .
since one  /  one  six be the high dilution in which a precipitin be observe , the titer be the reciprocal , or one  six .
ouchterlony assay
while the precipitin ring test provide insight into antibody - antigen interaction , - pron - also have some drawback .
- pron - require the use of large amount of serum , and great care must be take to avoid mix the solution and disrupt the ring .
perform a similar test in an agar gel matrix can minimize these problem .
this type of assay be variously call double immunodiffusion or the ouchterlony assay for orjan ouchterlony , [ six ] who first describe the technique in one  nine  four  eight .
when agar be highly purified , - pron - produce a clear , colorless gel .
hole be punch in the gel to form well , and antigen and antisera be add to neighbor well .
protein be able to diffuse through the gel , and precipitin arcs form between the well at the zone of equivalence .
because the precipitin lattice be too large to diffuse through the gel , the arc be firmly lock in place and easy to see ( figure two  zero  .  eight ) .
although there be now more sensitive and quantitative method of detect antibody - antigen interaction , the ouchterlony test provide a rapid and qualitative way of determine whether an antiserum have antibody against a particular antigen .
the ouchterlony test be particularly useful when look for cross - reactivity .
- pron - can check an antiserum against a group of closely related antigen and see which combination form precipitin arc .
six .
ouchterlony , örjan , “
in vitro method for test the toxin - producing capacity of diphtheria bacteria , " acta pathologica microbiologica scandinavica two  six , no .
four ( one  nine  four  nine )  five  one  six - two  four . eight  six  eight chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  eight
the ouchterlony test place antigen ( well a ) and antisera ( well one through five ) in a gel .
the antibody and antigen diffuse through the gel , cause a precipitin arc to form at the zone of equivalence .
in this example , only the antiserum in well one contain antibody to the antigen .
the result precipitin arc be stable because the lattice be too large to diffuse through the gel .
( credit leave  modification of work by higgins pj , tong c , borenfreund e , okin rs , bendich a )
radial immunodiffusion
assay
the radial immunodiffusion ( rid ) assay be similar to the ouchterlony assay but be use to precisely quantify antigen concentration rather than to compare different antigen .
in this assay , the antiserum be add to temper agar ( liquid agar at slightly above four  five ° c ) , which be pour into a small petri dish or onto a glass slide and allow to cool .
wells be cut in the cool agar , and antigen be then add to the well and allow to diffuse .
as the antigen and antibody interact , - pron - form a zone of precipitation .
the square of the diameter of the zone of precipitation be directly proportional to the concentration of antigen .
by measure the zone of precipitation produce by sample of know concentration ( see the outer ring of sample in figure two  zero  .  nine ) , - pron - can prepare a standard curve for determine the concentration of an unknown solution .
the rid assay be a also useful test for determine the concentration of many serum protein such as the c three and c four complement protein , among other .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  six  nine figure two  zero  .  nine
in this radial immunodiffusion ( rid ) assay , an antiserum be mixed with the agar before - pron - be cool , and solution contain antigen be add to each well in increase concentration ( well one – four ) .
an antigen solution of an unknown concentration be add to well five .
the zone of precipitation be measure and plot against a standard curve to determine the antigen concentration of the unknown sample .
( credit circle  modification of work by kangwa m , yelemane v , polat an , gorrepati kd , grasselli m , fernández - lahore m )

why do a precipitin ring form in a precipitin ring test , and what be some reason why a ring may not form ?

compare and contrast the technique use in an ouchterlony assay and a radial immunodiffusion assay .
flocculation assays
a flocculation assay be similar to a precipitin reaction except that - pron - involve insoluble antigen such as lipid .
a flocculant be similar to a precipitin in that there be a visible lattice of antigen and antibody , but because lipid be insoluble in aqueous solution , - pron - can not precipitate .
instead of precipitation , flocculation ( foaming ) be observe in the test tube fluid .
use flocculation to test for syphilis syphilis be a sexually transmit infection that can cause severe , chronic disease in adult .
in addition , - pron - be readily pass from infected mother to - pron - newborn during pregnancy and childbirth , often result in stillbirth or serious long - term health problem for the infant .
unfortunately , syphilis can also be difficult to diagnose in expectant mother , because - pron - be often asymptomatic , especially in woman .
in addition , the causative agent , the bacterium treponema pallidum , be both difficult to grow on conventional lab medium and too small to see use routine microcopy .
for these reason , presumptive diagnosis of syphili be generally confirm indirectly in the laboratory use test that detect antibody to treponemal antigen .
in one  nine  zero  six , german scientist august von wassermann ( one  eight  six  six – one  nine  two  five ) introduce the first test for syphilis that rely
micro connections eight  seven  zero chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five on detect anti - treponemal antibody in the patient 's blood .
the antibody detect in the wassermann test be antiphospholipid antibody that be nonspecific to t . pallidum .
- pron - presence can assist in the diagnosis of syphilis , but because - pron - be nonspecific , - pron - can also lead to false - positive result in patient with other disease and autoimmune condition .
the original wasserman test have be modify over the year to minimize false - positive and be now know as the venereal disease research lab test , better know by - pron - acronym , the vdrl test .
to perform the vdrl test , patient serum or cerebral spinal fluid be place on a slide with a mixture of cardiolipin ( an antigenic phospholipid find in the mitochondrial membrane of various pathogen ) , lecithin , and cholesterol .
the lecithin and cholesterol stabilize the reaction and diminish false positive .
anti - treponemal antibody from an infected patient 's serum will bind cardiolipin and form a flocculant .
although the vdrl test be more specific than the original wassermann assay , false positive may still occur in patient with autoimmune disease that cause extensive cell damage ( e . g . , systemic lupus erythematosus ) .
neutralization assay
to cause infection , virus must bind to receptor on host cell .
antiviral antibody can neutralize viral infection by coat the virion , block the bind ( figure one  eight  .  seven ) .
this activity neutralize virion and can result in the formation of large antibody - virus complex ( which be readily remove by phagocytosis ) or by antibody bind to the virus and block - pron - bind to host cell receptor .
this neutralization activity be the basis of neutralization assay , sensitive assay use for diagnosis of viral infection .
when virus infect cell , - pron - often cause damage ( cytopathic effect ) that may include lysis of the host cell .
cytopathic effect can be visualize by grow host cell in a petri dish , cover the cell with a thin layer of agar , and then add virus ( see isolation , culture , and identification of viruses ) .
the virus will diffuse very slowly through the agar .
a virus will enter a host cell , proliferate ( cause cell damage ) , be release from the dead host cell , and then move to neighboring cell .
as more and more cell die , plaque of dead cell will form ( figure two  zero  .  one  zero ) .
during the course of a viral infection , the patient will mount an antibody response to the virus , and - pron - can quantify those antibody use a plaque reduction assay .
to perform the assay , a serial dilution be carry out on a serum sample .
each dilution be then mix with a standardized amount of the suspect virus .
any virus - specific antibody in the serum will neutralize some of the virus .
the suspension be then add to host cell in culture to allow any nonneutralized virus to infect the cell and form plaque after several day .
the titer be define as the reciprocal of the high dilution show a five  zero % reduction in plaque .
titer be always express as a whole number .
for example , if a one  /  six  four dilution be the high dilution to show five  zero % plaque reduction , then the titer be six  four .
the presence of antibody in the patient 's serum do not tell - pron - whether the patient be currently infect or be infect in the past .
current infection can be identify by wait two week and test another serum sample .
a four - fold increase in neutralize titer in this second sample indicate a new infection .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  seven  one
figure two  zero  .  one  zero
in a neutralization assay , antibody in patient serum neutralize virus add to the well , prevent the formation of plaque .
in the assay picture , the well with numerous plaque ( white patch ) contain a low concentration of antibody .
the well with relatively few plaque have a high concentration of antibody .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

in a neutralization assay , if a patient 's serum have high number of antiviral antibody , would - pron - expect to see more or few plaque ?
immunoelectrophoresis
when a patient have elevate protein level in the blood or be lose protein in the urine , a clinician will often order a polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( page ) assay ( see visualizing and characterizing dna , rna , and protein ) .
this assay compare the relative abundance of the various type of serum protein .
abnormal protein electrophoresis pattern can be further study use immunoelectrophoresis ( iep ) .
the iep begin by run a page .
antisera against select serum protein be add to trough run parallel to the electrophoresis track , form precipitin arc similar to those see in an ouchterlony assay ( figure two  zero  .  one  one ) .
this allow the identification of abnormal immunoglobulin protein in the sample .
iep be particularly useful in the diagnosis of multiple myeloma , a cancer of antibody - secrete cell .
patient with multiple myeloma can not produce healthy antibody  instead - pron - produce abnormal antibody that be monoclonal protein ( m protein ) .
thus , patient with multiple myeloma will present with elevated serum protein level that show a distinct band in the gamma globulin region of a protein electrophoresis gel and a sharp spike ( in m protein ) on the densitometer scan rather than the normal broad smear ( figure two  zero  .  one  two ) .
when antibody against the various type of antibody heavy and light chain be use to form precipitin arc , the m protein will cause distinctly skew arc against one class of heavy chain and one class of light chain as see in figure two  zero  .  one  one .
eight  seven  two chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  one  one ( a )
this graph show normal measurement of serum protein .
( b )
this photograph show an immunoelectrophoresis of urine .
after electrophoresis , antisera be add to the trough and the precipitin arc form , illustrate the distribution of specific protein .
the skewed arc ( arrow ) help to diagnose multiple myeloma .
( credit a , b  modification of work by izawa s , akimoto t , ikeuchi h , kusano e , nagata d )
protein electrophoresis and the characterization of immunoglobulin structure
the advent of electrophoresis ultimately lead to research and understand the structure of antibody .
when swedish biochemist arne tiselius ( one  nine  zero  two – one  nine  seven  one ) publish the first protein electrophoresis result in one  nine  three  seven  , [ seven ] - pron - could identify the protein albumin ( the small and most abundant serum protein ) by the sharp band - pron - produce in the gel .
the other serum protein could not be resolve in a simple protein electrophoresis , so - pron - name the three broad band , with many protein in each band , alpha , beta , and gamma globulin .
two year later , american immunologist elvin kabat ( one  nine  one  four – two  zero  zero  zero ) travel to sweden to work with tiselius use this new technique and show that antibody migrate as gamma globulins . [ eight ]
with this new understanding in hand , researcher soon learn that multiple myeloma , because - pron - be a cancer of antibody - secrete cell , could be tentatively diagnose by the presence of a large m spike in the gamma - globulin region by protein electrophoresis .
prior to this discovery , study on immunoglobulin structure have be minimal , because of the difficulty of obtain pure sample to study .
sera from multiple myeloma patient prove to be an excellent source of highly enrich monoclonal immunoglobulin , provide the raw material for study over the next two  zero  - plus year that result in the elucidation of the structure of immunoglobulin .
micro connections seven .
tiselius , arne , “ electrophoresis of serum globulin 
electrophoretic analysis of normal and immune sera , ” biochemical journal three  one , no . nine ( one  nine  three  seven )
 one  four  six  four .
eight .
tiselius , arne and elvin a . kabat .
“
an electrophoretic study of immune sera and purified antibody preparations , " the journal of experimental medicine six  nine ,
no .
one ( one  nine  three  nine ) 
one  one  nine - three  one .
chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  seven  three figure two  zero  .  one  two electrophoresis pattern of myeloma ( right ) and normal sera
( left ) .
the protein have be stain  when the density of each band be quantify by densitometry , the datum produce the bar graph on the right .
both gel show the expect dense band of albumin at the bottom and an abnormal spike in the gamma - globulin region .
( credit  modification of work by soodgupta d , hurchla ma , jiang m , zheleznyak a , weilbaecher kn , anderson cj , tomasson mh , shokeen m )

in general , what do an immunoelectrophoresis assay accomplish ?
immunoblot assay  the western blot
after perform protein gel electrophoresis , specific protein can be identify in the gel use antibody .
this technique be know as the western blot .
follow separation of protein by page , the protein antigen in the gel be transfer to and immobilize on a nitrocellulose membrane .
this membrane can then be expose to a primary antibody produce to specifically bind to the protein of interest .
a second antibody equip with a molecular beacon will then bind to the first .
these secondary antibody be couple to another molecule such as an enzyme or a fluorophore ( a molecule that fluoresce when excite by light ) .
when use antibody couple to enzyme , a chromogenic substrate for the enzyme be add .
this substrate be usually colorless but will develop color in the presence of the antibody .
the fluorescence or substrate coloring identifie the location of the specific protein in the membrane to which the antibody be bind ( figure two  zero  .  one  three ) .
typically , polyclonal antibody be use for western blot assay .
- pron - be more sensitive than mab because of - pron - ability to bind to various epitope of the primary antigen , and the signal from polyclonal antibody be typically strong than that from mabs .
monoclonal antibody can also be use  however , - pron - be much more expensive to produce and be less sensitive , since - pron - be only able to recognize one specific epitope .
several variation of the western blot be useful in research .
in a southwestern blot , protein be separate by sds - page , blot onto a nitrocellulose membrane , allow to renature , and then probe with a fluorescently or radioactively label dna probe  the purpose of the southwestern be to identify specific dna - protein interaction .
far - western blot be carry out to determine protein - protein interaction between immobilized protein ( separate by sds - page , blot onto a nitrocellulose membrane , and allow to renature ) and non - antibody protein probe .
the bound non - antibody protein that interact with the immobilized protein in a far - western blot may be detect by radiolabeling , fluorescence , or the use of an antibody with an enzymatic molecular beacon .
eight  seven  four
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  one  three ( a )
this diagram summarize the process of western blotting .
antibody be use to identify specific band on the protein gel .
( b )
a western blot test for antibody against hiv .
the top strip be the negative control  the next strip be the positive control .
the bottom two strip be patient serum sample contain antibody .
( credit a  modification of work by “ bensaccount” / wikimedia commons ) chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  seven  five

what be the function of the enzyme in the immunoblot assay ?
complement - mediated immunoassay
one of the key function of antibody be the activation ( fixation ) of complement .
when antibody bind to bacteria , for example , certain complement protein recognize the bind antibody and activate the complement cascade .
in response , other complement protein bind to the bacteria where some serve as opsonin to increase the efficiency of phagocytosis and other create hole in gram - negative bacterial cell membrane , cause lysis .
this lytic activity can be use to detect the presence of antibody against specific antigen in the serum .
red blood cell be good indicator cell to use when evaluate complement - mediate cytolysis .
hemolysis of red blood cell release hemoglobin , which be a brightly color pigment , and hemolysis of even a small number of red cell will cause the solution to become noticeably pink ( figure two  zero  .  one  four ) .
this characteristic play a role in the complement fixation test , which allow the detection of antibody against specific pathogen .
the complement fixation test can be use to check for antibody against pathogen that be difficult to culture in the lab such as fungi , virus , or the bacteria chlamydia .
to perform the complement fixation test , antigen from a pathogen be add to patient serum .
if antibody to the antigen be present , the antibody will bind the antigen and fix all the available complement .
when red blood cell and antibody against red blood cell be subsequently add to the mix , there will be no complement leave to lyse the red cell .
thus , if the solution remain clear , the test be positive .
if there be no antipathogen antibody in the patient 's serum , the add antibody will activate the complement to lyse the red cell , yield a negative test ( figure two  zero  .  one  four ) .
eight  seven  six chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  one  four
the complement fixation test be use to determine whether a patient 's serum contain antibody to a specific antigen .
if - pron - do , complement fixation will occur , and there will be no complement available to lyse the antibody - bind sheep red blood cell that be add to the solution in the next step .
if the sample do not contain antibody to the antigen , hemolysis of the sheep blood cell will be observe .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  seven  seven view this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two complfixatst ) to see an outline of the step of the complement fixation test .

in a complement fixation test , if the serum turn pink , do the patient have antibody to the antigen or not ?
explain .
table two  zero  .  two summarize the various type of antibody - antigen assay discuss in this section .
mechanism of select antibody - antigen assays type of assay mechanism examples precipitin ring test to visualize lattice formation in solution immunoelectrophoresis to examine distribution of antigen follow electrophoresis ouchterlony assay to compare diverse antigen precipitation antibody bind to soluble antigen , form a visible precipitin radial immunodiffusion assay to quantify antigen flocculation antibody bind to insoluble molecule in suspension , form visible aggregate vdrl test for syphilis neutralization antibody bind to virus , block viral entry into target cell and prevent formation of plaque plaque reduction assay for detect presence of neutralize antibody in patient sera complement activation antibody bind to antigen , induce complement activation and leave no complement to lyse red blood cell complement fixation test for patient antibody against hard - to - culture bacteria such as chlamydia table two  zero  .  two link to learn eight  seven  eight chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  zero  .  three agglutination assays learning objectives

compare direct and indirect agglutination  identify various use of hemagglutination in the diagnosis of disease 
explain how blood type be determine 
explain the step use to cross - match blood to be use in a transfusion
in addition to cause precipitation of soluble molecule and flocculation of molecule in suspension , antibody can also clump together cell or particle ( e . g . , antigen - coat latex bead ) in a process call agglutination ( figure one  eight  .  nine ) .
agglutination can be use as an indicator of the presence of antibody against bacteria or red blood cell .
agglutination assay be usually quick and easy to perform on a glass slide or microtiter plate ( figure two  zero  .  one  five ) .
microtiter plate have an array of well to hold small volume of reagent and to observe reaction ( e . g . , agglutination ) either visually or use a specially design spectrophotometer .
the well come in many different size for assay involve different volume of reagent .
figure two  zero  .  one  five
microtiter plate be use for conduct numerous reaction simultaneously in an array of well .
( credit  modification of work by “ microrao” / wikimedia ) agglutination of bacteria and viruses
the use of agglutination test to identify streptococcal bacteria be develop in the one  nine  two  zero s by rebecca lancefield work with - pron - colleague a . r . dochez and oswald avery . [ nine ]
- pron - use antibody to identify m protein , a virulence factor on streptococci that be necessary for the bacteria 's ability to cause strep throat .
production of antibody against m protein be crucial in mount a protective response against the bacteria .
lancefield use antisera to show that different strain of the same specie of streptococci express different version of m protein , which explain why child can come down with strep throat repeatedly .
lancefield classify betahemolytic streptococci into many group base on antigenic difference in group - specific polysaccharide locate in the bacterial cell wall .
the strain be call serovar because - pron - be differentiate use antisera .
identify the serovar present in a disease outbreak be important because some serovar may cause more severe disease than other .
the method develop by lancefield be a direct agglutination assay , since the bacterial cell - pron - agglutinate .
a similar strategy be more commonly use today when identify serovar of bacteria and virus  however , to nine .
lancefield , rebecca c . , “
the antigenic complex of streptococcus haemoliticus .
i . demonstration of a type - specific substance in extracts of streptococcus haemolyticus , " the journal of experimental medicine four  seven , no . one ( one  nine  two  eight )  nine  one - one  zero  three .
chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  seven  nine improve visualization of the agglutination , the antibody may be attach to inert latex bead .
this technique be call an indirect agglutination assay ( or latex fixation assay ) , because the agglutination of the bead be a marker for antibody bind to some other antigen ( figure two  zero  .  one  six ) .
indirect assay can be use to detect the presence of either antibody or specific antigen .
figure two  zero  .  one  six antibody against six different serovar of group a strep be attach to latex bead .
each of the six antibody preparation be mix with bacteria isolate from a patient .
the tiny clump see in well four be indicative of agglutination , which be absent from all other well .
this indicate that the serovar associate with well four be present in the patient sample .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
to identify antibody in a patient 's serum , the antigen of interest be attach to latex bead .
when mix with patient serum , the antibody will bind the antigen , cross - link the latex bead and cause the bead to agglutinate indirectly  this indicate the presence of the antibody ( figure two  zero  .  one  seven ) .
this technique be most often use when look for igm antibody , because - pron - structure provide maximum cross - linking .
one widely use example of this assay be a test for rheumatoid factor ( rf ) to confirm a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis .
rf be , in fact , the presence of igm antibody that bind to the patient
's own
igg . rf will agglutinate igg - coat latex bead .
in the reverse test , soluble antigen can be detect in a patient 's serum by attach specific antibody ( commonly mab ) to the latex bead and mix this complex with the serum ( figure two  zero  .  one  seven ) .
agglutination test be widely use in underdeveloped country that may lack appropriate facility for culturing bacteria .
for example , the widal test , use for the diagnosis of typhoid fever , look for agglutination of salmonella enterica subspecie typhi in patient sera .
the widal test be rapid , inexpensive , and useful for monitor the extent of an outbreak  however , - pron - be not as accurate as test that involve culture of the bacteria .
the widal test frequently produce false positive in patient with previous infection with other subspecie of salmonella , as well as false negative in patient with hyperproteinemia or immune deficiency .
in addition , agglutination test be limit by the fact that patient generally do not produce detectable level of antibody during the first week ( or longer ) of an infection .
a patient be say to have undergone seroconversion when antibody level reach the threshold for detection .
typically , seroconversion coincide with the onset of sign and symptom of disease .
however , in an hiv infection , for example , - pron - generally take three week for seroconversion to take place , and in some instance , - pron - may take much longer .
similar to technique for the precipitin ring test and plaque assay , - pron - be routine to prepare serial two - fold dilution of the patient 's serum and determine the titer of agglutinate antibody present .
since antibody level change over time in both primary and secondary immune response , by check sample over time , change in antibody titer can be detect .
for example , a comparison of the titer during the acute phase of an infection versus the titer from the convalescent phase will distinguish whether an infection be current or have occur in the past .
- pron - be also possible to eight  eight  zero chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five monitor how well the patient 's immune system be respond to the pathogen .
figure two  zero  .  one  seven ( a )
latex bead coat with an antigen will agglutinate when mix with patient serum if the serum contain igm antibody against the antigen .
( b )
latex bead coat with antibody will agglutinate when mix with patient serum if the serum contain antigen specific to the antibody .
watch this video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two agglrealatbe ) that demonstrate agglutination reaction with latex bead .

how be agglutination use to distinguish serovar from each other ?

in a latex bead assay to test for antibody in a patient ' s serum , with what be the bead coat ?

what have happen when a patient have undergo seroconversion ?
hemagglutination agglutination of red blood cell be call hemagglutination .
one common assay that use hemagglutination be the direct coombs ' test , also call the direct antihuman globulin test ( dat ) , which generally look for nonagglutinate antibody .
the test can also detect complement attach to red blood cell .
the coombs ' test be often employ when a newborn have jaundice , yellow of the skin cause by high blood concentration of bilirubin , a product of the breakdown of hemoglobin in the blood .
the coombs ' test be use to link to learning chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  eight  one determine whether the child 's red blood cell have be bind by the mother 's antibody .
these antibody would activate complement , lead to red blood cell lysis and the subsequent jaundice .
other condition that can cause positive direct coombs ' test include hemolytic transfusion reaction , autoimmune hemolytic anemia , infectious mononucleosis ( cause by epstein - barr virus ) , syphilis , and mycoplasma pneumonia .
a positive direct coombs ' test may also be see in some cancer and as an allergic reaction to some drug ( e . g . , penicillin ) .
the antibody bind to red blood cell in these condition be most often igg , and because of the orientation of the antigen - bind site on igg and the comparatively large size of a red blood cell , - pron - be unlikely that any visible agglutination will occur .
however , the presence of igg bind to red blood cell can be detect by add coombs ' reagent , an antiserum contain antihuman igg antibody ( that may be combine with anti - complement )
( figure two  zero  .  one  eight ) .
the coombs ' reagent link the igg attach to neighbor red blood cell and thus promote agglutination .
there be also an indirect coombs ' test know as the indirect antiglobulin test ( iat ) .
this screen an individual for antibody against red blood cell antigen ( other than the a and b antigen ) that be unbound in a patient 's serum ( figure two  zero  .  one  eight ) .
iat can be use to screen pregnant woman for antibody that may cause hemolytic disease of the newborn .
- pron - can also be use prior to give blood transfusion .
more detail on how the iat be perform be discuss below .
eight  eight  two chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  one  eight
the step in direct and indirect coombs ' test be show in the illustration .
antibody that bind to red blood cell be not the only cause of hemagglutination .
some virus also bind to red blood cell , and this binding can cause agglutination when the virus cross - link the red blood cell .
for example , influenza virus have two different type of viral spike call neuraminidase ( n ) and hemagglutinin ( h ) , the latter name for - pron - ability to agglutinate red blood cell ( see viruses ) .
thus , - pron - can use red blood cell to detect the presence of influenza virus by direct hemagglutination assay ( ha ) , in which the virus cause visible agglutination of red blood cell .
the mump and rubella virus can also be detect use ha .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  eight  three
most frequently , a serial dilution viral agglutination assay be use to measure the titer or estimate the amount of virus produce in cell culture or for vaccine production .
a viral titer can be determine use a direct ha by make a serial dilution of the sample contain the virus , start with a high concentration of sample that be then dilute in a series of well .
the high dilution produce visible agglutination be the titer .
the assay be carry out in a microtiter plate with v - or round - bottom well .
in the presence of agglutinate virus , the red blood cell and virus clump together and produce a diffuse mat over the bottom of the well .
in the absence of virus , the red blood cell roll or sediment to the bottom of the well and form a dense pellet , which be why flat - bottom well can not be use ( figure two  zero  .  one  nine ) .
a modification of the ha assay can be use to determine the titer of antiviral antibody .
the presence of these antibody in a patient 's serum or in a lab - produce antiserum will neutralize the virus and block - pron - from agglutinate the red cell , make this a viral hemagglutination inhibition assay ( hia ) .
in this assay , patient serum be mixed with a standardized amount of virus .
after a short incubation , a standardized amount of red blood cell be add and hemagglutination be observe .
the titer of the patient 's serum be the high dilution that block agglutination ( figure two  zero  .  two  zero ) .
figure two  zero  .  one  nine
a viral suspension be mix with a standardized amount of red blood cell .
no agglutination of red blood cell be visible when the virus be absent , and the cell form a compact pellet at the bottom of the well .
in the presence of virus , a diffuse pink precipitate form in the well .
( credit bottom  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) eight  eight  four chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two  zero
in this hia , serum contain antibody to influenzavirus underwent serial two - fold dilution in a microtiter plate .
red blood cell be then add to the well .
agglutination only occur in those well where the antibody be too dilute to neutralize the virus .
the high concentration at which agglutination occur be the titer of the antibody in the patient 's serum .
in the case of this test , sample a show a titer of one  two  eight , and sample c show a titer of six  four .
( credit  modification of work by evan burkala )

what be the mechanism by which virus be detect in a hemagglutination assay ?

which hemagglutination result tell - pron - the titer of virus in a sample ?
animal in the laboratory much of what - pron - know today about the human immune system have be learn through research conduct use animal - primarily , mammal - as model .
besides research , mammal be also use for the production of most of the antibody and other immune system component need for immunodiagnostic .
vaccine , diagnostic , therapy , and translational medicine in general have all be develop through research with animal model .
eye on ethics chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  eight  five consider some of the common use of laboratory animal for produce immune system component .
guinea pig be use as a source of complement , and mouse be the primary source of cell for make mabs .
these mab can be use in research and for therapeutic purpose .
antisera be raise in a variety of specie , include horse , sheep , goat , and rabbit .
when produce an antiserum , the animal will usually be inject at least twice , and adjuvant may be use to boost the antibody response .
the large animal use for make antisera will have blood harvest repeatedly over long period of time , with little harm to the animal , but that be not usually the case for rabbit .
although - pron - can obtain a few milliliter of blood from the ear vein of rabbit , - pron - usually need large volume , which result in the death of the animal .
- pron - also use animal for the study of disease .
the only way to grow treponema pallidum for the study of syphilis be in living animal .
many virus can be grow in cell culture , but growth in cell culture tell - pron - very little about how the immune system will respond to the virus .
when work on a newly discover disease , - pron - still employ koch 's postulate , which require cause disease in lab animal use pathogen from pure culture as a crucial step in prove that a particular microorganism be the cause of a disease .
study the proliferation of bacteria and virus in animal host , and how the host immune system respond , have be central to microbiological research for well over one  zero  zero year .
while the practice of use laboratory animal be essential to scientific research and medical diagnostic , many people strongly object to the exploitation of animal for human benefit .
this ethical argument be not a new one - indeed , one of charles darwin ' s daughter be an active antivivisectionist ( vivisection be the practice of cut or dissect a live animal to study - pron - ) .
most scientist acknowledge that there should be limit on the extent to which animal can be exploit for research purpose .
ethical consideration have lead the national institutes of health ( nih ) to develop strict regulation on the type of research that may be perform .
these regulation also include guideline for the humane treatment of lab animal , set standard for - pron - housing , care , and euthanization .
the nih document “ guide for the care and use of laboratory animals
" make - pron - clear that the use of animal in research be a privilege grant by society to researcher .
the nih guideline be base on the principle of the three r 's  replace , refine , and reduce .
researcher should strive to replace animal model with nonlive model , replace vertebrate with invertebrate whenever possible , or use computer - model when applicable .
- pron - should refine husbandry and experimental procedure to reduce pain and suffering , and use experimental design and procedure that reduce the number of animal need to obtain the desire information .
to obtain funding , researcher must satisfy nih reviewer that the research justify the use of animal and that - pron - use be in accordance with the guideline .
at the local level , any facility that use animal and receive federal funding must have an institutional animal care and use committee ( iacuc ) that ensure that the nih guideline be be follow .
the iacuc must include researcher , administrator , a veterinarian , and at least one person with no tie to the institution , that is , a concerned citizen .
this committee also perform inspection of laboratory and protocol .
for research involve human subject , an institutional review board ( irb ) ensure that proper guideline be follow .
visit this site ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two nihcareuseani ) to view the nih guide for the care and use of laboratory animals .
blood typing and cross - matching
in addition to antibody against bacteria and virus to which - pron - have previously be expose , most individual also carry antibody against blood type other than - pron - own .
there be presently three  three immunologically important link to learn eight  eight  six chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five blood - type system , many of which be restrict within various ethnic group or rarely result in the production of antibody .
the most important and perhaps best know be the abo and rh blood group ( see figure one  nine  .  four ) .
when unit of blood be be consider for transfusion , pretransfusion blood testing must be perform .
for the blood unit , commercially prepared antibody against the a , b , and rh antigen be mix with red blood cell from the unit to initially confirm that the blood type on the unit be accurate .
once a unit of blood have be request for transfusion , - pron - be vitally important to make sure the donor ( unit of blood ) and recipient ( patient ) be compatible for these crucial antigen .
in addition to confirm the blood type of the unit , the patient 's blood type be also confirm use the same commercially prepared antibody to a , b , and rh .
for example , as show in figure two  zero  .  two  one , if the donor blood be a - positive , - pron - will agglutinate with the anti - a antiserum and with the anti - rh antiserum .
if no agglutination be observe with any of the sera , then the blood type would be o - negative .
follow determination of the blood type , immediately prior to release the blood for transfusion , a cross - match be perform in which a small aliquot of the donor red blood cell be mix with serum from the patient awaiting transfusion .
if the patient do have antibody against the donor red blood cell , hemagglutination will occur .
to confirm any negative test result and check for sensitized red blood cell , coombs ' reagent may be add to the mix to facilitate visualization of the antibody - red blood cell interaction .
under some circumstance , a minor cross - match may be perform as well .
in this assay , a small aliquot of donor serum be mixed with patient red blood cell .
this allow the detection of agglutinize antibody in the donor serum .
this test be rarely necessary because transfusion generally use pack red blood cell with most of the plasma remove by centrifugation .
red blood cell have many other antigen in addition to abo and rh .
while most people be unlikely to have antibody against these antigen , woman who have have multiple pregnancy or patient who have have multiple transfusion may have - pron - because of repeat exposure .
for this reason , an antibody screen test be use to determine if such antibody be present .
patient serum be check against commercially prepare , pooled , type o red blood cell that express these antigen .
if agglutination occur , the antigen to which the patient be respond must be identify and determine not to be present in the donor unit .
figure two  zero  .  two  one
this sample of a commercially produce " bedside " card enable quick typing of both a recipient 's and donor 's blood before transfusion .
the card contain three reaction site or well .
one be coat with an anti - a antibody , one with an anti - b antibody , and one with an anti - rh antibody .
agglutination of red blood cell in a give site indicate a positive identification of the blood antigen  in this case , a and rh antigen for blood type a - positive .

if a patient ' s blood agglutinate with anti - b serum , what be the patient 's blood type ?

what be a cross - match assay , and why be - pron - perform ?
table two  zero  .  three summarize the various kind of agglutination assay discuss in this section .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  eight  seven mechanisms of select antibody - antigen assays type of assay mechanism example
direct 
antibody be use to clump bacterial cell or other large structure agglutination serotyping bacteria indirect 
latex bead be couple with antigen or antibody to look for antibody or antigen , respectively , in patient serum confirm the presence of rheumatoid factor ( igmbinding ig ) in patient serum direct 
some bacteria and virus cross - link red blood cell and clump - pron - together diagnose influenza , mump , and measle direct coombs ' test ( dat ) 
detect nonagglutinate antibody or complement protein on red blood cell in vivo check for maternal antibody bind to neonatal red blood cell indirect coombs ' test ( iat )  screens an individual for antibody against red blood cell antigen ( other than the a and b antigen ) that be unbound in a patient 's serum in
vitro performing
pretransfusion blood testing viral hemagglutination inhibition 
use antibody from a patient to inhibit viral agglutination diagnose various viral disease by the presence of patient antibody against the virus hemagglutination blood typing and cross - match  detects abo , rh , and minor antigen in the blood matches donor blood to recipient immune requirement table two  zero  .  three two  zero  .  four eia and elisas learning objectives

explain the difference and similarity between eia , feia , and elisa

describe the difference and similarity between immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry
 describe the different purpose of direct and indirect elisa similar to the western blot , enzyme immunoassay ( eia ) use antibody to detect the presence of antigen .
however , eia differ from western blot in that the assay be conduct in microtiter plate or in vivo rather than on an absorbent membrane .
there be many different type of eia , but - pron - all involve an antibody molecule whose constant region bind an enzyme , leave the variable region free to bind - pron - specific antigen .
the addition of a substrate for the enzyme allow the antigen to be visualize or quantify ( figure two  zero  .  two  two ) .
in eia , the substrate for the enzyme be most often a chromogen , a colorless molecule that be convert into a colored end product .
the most widely use enzyme be alkaline phosphatase and horseradish peroxidase for which appropriate substrate be readily available .
in some eia , the substrate be a fluorogen , a nonfluorescent molecule that the enzyme convert into a fluorescent form .
eia that utilize a fluorogen be call fluorescent enzyme immunoassay ( feias ) .
fluorescence can be detect by either a fluorescence microscope or a spectrophotometer .
eight  eight  eight chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two  two
enzyme immunoassay , such as the direct elisa show here , use an enzyme - antibody conjugate to deliver a detectable substrate to the site of an antigen .
the substrate may be a colorless molecule that be convert into a colored end product or an inactive fluorescent molecule that fluoresce after enzyme activation .
( credit  modification of work by “ cavitri” / wikimedia commons )
the mmr titer
the mmr vaccine be a combination vaccine that provide protection against measle , mump , and rubella ( german measle ) .
most people receive the mmr vaccine as child and thus have antibody against these disease .
however , for various reason , even vaccinate individual may become susceptible to these disease again later in life .
for example , some child may receive only one round of the mmr vaccine instead of the recommend two .
in addition , the titer of protective antibody in an individual 's body may begin to decline with age or as the result of some medical condition .
to determine whether the titer of antibody in an individual 's bloodstream be sufficient to provide protection , an mmr titer test can be perform .
the test be a simple immunoassay that can be do quickly with a blood sample .
the result of the test will indicate whether the individual still have immunity or need another dose of the mmr vaccine .
submit to an mmr titer be often a pre - employment requirement for healthcare worker , especially those who will frequently be in contact with young child or immunocompromise patient .
be a healthcare worker to become infected with measle , mump , or rubella , the individual could easily pass these disease on to susceptible patient , lead to an outbreak .
depend on the result of the mmr titer , healthcare worker may need to be revaccinate prior to begin work .
immunostaine one powerful use of eia be immunostaine , in which antibody - enzyme conjugate enhance microscopy .
immunohistochemistry ( ihc ) be use for examine whole tissue .
as see in figure two  zero  .  two  three , a section of tissue can be stain to visualize the various cell type .
in this example , a mab against cd eight be use to stain cd eight cell in a section of tonsil tissue .
- pron - be now possible to count the number of cd eight cell , determine - pron - relative number versus the other cell type present , and determine the location of these cell within this tissue .
such datum would be useful for study disease such as aids , in which the normal function of cd eight cell be crucial for slow disease progression .
immunocytochemistry ( icc ) be another valuable form of immunostaining .
while similar to ihc , in icc , extracellular matrix material be strip away , and the cell membrane be etch with alcohol to make - pron - permeable micro connections chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  eight  nine to antibody .
this allow antibody to pass through the cell membrane and bind to specific target inside the cell .
organelle , cytoskeletal component , and other intracellular structure can be visualize in this way .
while some icc technique use eia , the enzyme can be replace with a fluorescent molecule , make - pron - a fluorescent immunoassay .
figure two  zero  .  two  three enzyme - link antibody against cd eight be use to stain the cd eight cell in this preparation of bone marrow use a chromogen .
( credit  modification of work by yamashita m , fujii y , ozaki k , urano y , iwasa m , nakamura s , fujii s , abe m , sato y , yoshino t )

what be the difference between immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry ?

what must be true of the product of the enzymatic reaction use in immunohistochemistry ?
enzyme - link immunosorbent assays ( elisas )
the enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisas ) be widely use eia .
in the direct elisa , antigen be immobilize in the well of a microtiter plate .
an antibody that be specific for a particular antigen and be conjugate to an enzyme be add to each well .
if the antigen be present , then the antibody will bind .
after wash to remove any unbound antibody , a colorless substrate ( chromogen ) be add .
the presence of the enzyme convert the substrate into a colored end product ( figure two  zero  .  two  two ) .
while this technique be fast because - pron - only require the use of one antibody , - pron - have the disadvantage that the signal from a direct elisa be low ( low sensitivity ) .
in a sandwich elisa , the goal be to use antibody to precisely quantify specific antigen present in a solution , such as antigen from a pathogen , a serum protein , or a hormone from the blood or urine to list just a few example .
the first step of a sandwich elisa be to add the primary antibody to all the well of a microtiter plate ( figure two  zero  .  two  four ) .
the antibody stick to the plastic by hydrophobic interaction .
after an appropriate incubation time , any unbound antibody be wash away .
comparable wash be use between each of the subsequent step to ensure that only specifically bind molecule remain attached to the plate .
a block protein be then add ( e . g . , albumin or the milk protein casein ) to bind the remain nonspecific protein - bind site in the well .
some of the well will receive known amount of antigen to allow the construction of a standard curve , and unknown antigen solution be add to the other well .
the primary antibody capture the antigen and , follow a wash , the secondary antibody be add , which be a polyclonal antibody that be conjugate to an enzyme .
after a final wash , a colorless substrate ( chromogen ) eight  nine  zero chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five be add , and the enzyme convert - pron - into a colored end product .
the color intensity of the sample cause by the end product be measure with a spectrophotometer .
the amount of color produce ( measure as absorbance ) be directly proportional to the amount of enzyme , which in turn be directly proportional to the capture antigen .
elisa be extremely sensitive , allow antigen to be quantify in the nanogram ( one  zero – nine g ) per ml range .
in an indirect elisa , - pron - quantify antigen - specific antibody rather than antigen .
- pron - can use indirect elisa to detect antibody against many type of pathogen , include borrelia burgdorferi ( lyme disease ) and hiv .
there be three important difference between indirect and direct elisa as show in figure two  zero  .  two  five .
rather than use antibody to capture antigen , the indirect elisa start with attach know antigen ( e . g . , peptide from hiv ) to the bottom of the microtiter plate well .
after block the unbound site on the plate , patient serum be add  if antibody be present ( primary antibody ) , - pron - will bind the antigen .
after wash away any unbound protein , the secondary antibody with - pron - conjugate enzyme be direct against the primary antibody ( e . g . , antihuman immunoglobulin ) .
the secondary antibody allow - pron - to quantify how much antigen - specific antibody be present in the patient 's serum by the intensity of the color produce from the conjugate enzyme - chromogen reaction .
as with several other test for antibody discuss in this chapter , there be always concern about cross - reactivity with antibody direct against some other antigen , which can lead to false - positive result .
thus , - pron - can not definitively diagnose an hiv infection ( or any other type of infection ) base on a single indirect elisa assay .
- pron - must confirm any suspect positive test , which be most often do use either an immunoblot that actually identify the presence of specific peptide from the pathogen or a test to identify the nucleic acid associate with the pathogen , such as reverse transcriptase pcr ( rt - pcr ) or a nucleic acid antigen test .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  nine  one figure two  zero  .  two  four ( a )
in a sandwich elisa , a primary antibody be use to first capture an antigen with the primary antibody .
a secondary antibody conjugate to an enzyme that also recognize epitope on the antigen be add .
after the addition of the chromogen , a spectrophotometer measure the absorbance of end product , which be directly proportional to the amount of capture antigen .
( b )
an elisa plate show dilution of antibody ( leave ) and antigen ( bottom ) .
high concentration result in a dark final color .
( credit b  modification of work by u . s . fish and wildlife service pacific region ) eight  nine  two
chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two  five
the indirect elisa be use to quantify antigen - specific antibody in patient serum for disease diagnosis .
antigen from the suspect disease agent be attach to microtiter plate .
the primary antibody come from the patient 's serum , which be subsequently bind by the enzyme - conjugate secondary antibody .
measure the production of end product allow - pron - to detect or quantify the amount of antigen - specific antibody present in the patient 's serum .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  nine  three

what be the purpose of the secondary antibody in a direct elisa ?

what do the direct and indirect elisa quantify ?
part two
although contact and test the one  three  zero  zero patient for hiv would be time consume and expensive , administrator hop to minimize the hospital 's liability by proactively seek out and treat potential victim of the rogue employee 's crime .
early detection of hiv be important , and prompt treatment can slow the progression of the disease .
there be a variety of screen test for hiv , but the most widely used be the indirect elisa .
as with other indirect elisas , the test work by attach antigen ( in this case , hiv peptide ) to a well in a nine  six  - well plate .
if the patient be hiv positive , anti - hiv antibody will bind to the antigen and be identify by the second antibodyenzyme conjugate .

how accurate be an indirect elisa test for hiv , and what factor could impact the test 's accuracy ?

should the hospital use any other test to confirm the result of the indirect elisa ?
jump to the previous clinical focus box .
jump to the next clinical focus box .
immunofiltration and immunochromatographic assays
for some situation , - pron - may be necessary to detect or quantify antigen or antibody that be present at very low concentration in solution .
immunofiltration technique have be develop to make this possible .
in immunofiltration , a large volume of fluid be pass through a porous membrane into an absorbent pad .
an antigen attach to the porous membrane will capture antibody as - pron - pass  alternatively , - pron - can also attach an antibody to the membrane to capture antigen .
the method of immunofiltration have be adapt in the development of immunochromatographic assay , commonly know as lateral flow test or strip test .
these test be quick and easy to perform , make - pron - popular for point - of - care use ( i . e . , in the doctor 's office ) or in - home use .
one example be the torch test that allow doctor to screen pregnant woman or newborn for infection by an array of virus and other pathogen ( toxoplasma , other virus , rubella , cytomegalovirus , herpe simplex ) .
in - home pregnancy test be another widely use example of a lateral flow test ( figure two  zero  .  two  six ) .
immunofiltration test be also popular in develop country , because - pron - be inexpensive and do not require constant refrigeration of the dry reagent .
however , the technology be also build into some sophisticated laboratory equipment .
in lateral flow test ( figure two  zero  .  two  seven ) , fluid such as urine be apply to an absorbent pad on the test strip .
the fluid flow by capillary action and move through a stripe of bead with antibody attach to - pron - surface .
the fluid in the sample actually hydrate the reagent , which be present in a dry state in the stripe .
antibody - coat bead make of latex or tiny gold particle will bind antigen in the test fluid .
the antibody - antigen complex then flow over a second stripe that have immobilize antibody against the antigen  this stripe will retain the bead that have bind antigen .
a third control stripe bind any bead .
a red color ( from gold particle ) or blue ( from latex bead ) develop at the test line indicate a positive test .
if the color only develop at the control line , the test be negative .
like elisa technique , lateral flow test take advantage of antibody sandwich , provide sensitivity and specificity .
while not as quantitative as elisa , these test have the advantage of be fast , inexpensive , and not dependent on special equipment .
thus , - pron - can be perform anywhere by anyone .
there be some concern about clinical focus eight  nine  four chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five put such powerful diagnostic test into the hand of people who may not understand the test ' limitation , such as the possibility of false - positive result .
while home pregnancy test have become widely accept , at - home antibodydetection test for disease like hiv have raise some concern in the medical community .
some have question whether self - administration of such test should be allow in the absence of medical personnel who can explain the test result and order appropriate confirmatory test .
however , with grow number of lateral flow test become available , and the rapid development of lab - on - a - chip technology ( figure two  zero  .  one ) , home medical test be likely to become even more commonplace in the future .
figure two  zero  .  two  six
a lateral flow test detect pregnancy - relate hormone in urine .
the control stripe verify the validity of the test and the test line determine the presence of pregnancy - relate hormone in the urine .
( credit  modification of work by klaus hoffmeier ) chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  nine  five figure two  zero  .  two  seven immunochromatographic assay , or lateral flow test , allow the testing of antigen in a dilute solution .
as the fluid flow through the test strip , - pron - rehydrate the reagent .
antibody conjugate to small particle bind the antigen in the first stripe and then flow onto the second stripe where - pron - be bind by a second , fixed antibody .
this produce a line of color , depend on the color of the bead .
the third , control stripe bind bead as well to indicate that the test be work properly .
( credit  modification of work by yeh ch , zhao zq , shen pl , lin yc )

what physical process do the lateral flow method require to function ?

explain the purpose of the third strip in a lateral flow assay .
eight  nine  six
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five table two  zero  .  four compare some of the key mechanism and example of some of the eia discuss in this section as well as immunoblot , which be discuss in detecting antigen - antibody complexes .
immunoblots and enzyme immunoassays type of
assay mechanism specific procedures examples immunoblot use enzyme - antibody conjugate to identify specific protein that have be transfer to an absorbent membrane western blot 
detect the presence of a particular protein detect the presence of hiv peptide ( or peptide from other infectious agent ) in patient sera immunostaining use enzyme - antibody conjugate to stain specific molecule on or in cell
immunohistochemistry
 use to stain specific cell in a tissue stain for presence of cd eight cell in host tissue direct elisa  use a single antibody to detect the presence of an antigen detection of hiv antigen p two  four up to one month after be infect enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisa )
use enzyme - antibody conjugate to quantify target molecule indirect elisa  measure the amount of antibody produce against an antigen detection of hiv antibody in serum detection of antibody for various pathogen in patient sera ( e . g . , rapid strep , malaria dipstick )
immunochromatographic ( lateral flow ) assay techniques use the capture of flow , color - label antigen - antibody complex by fix antibody for disease diagnosis sandwich elisa 
measure the amount of antigen bind by the antibody pregnancy test detect human chorionic gonadotrophin in urine table two  zero  .  four part three
although the indirect elisa for hiv be a sensitive assay , there be several complicating consideration .
first , if an infected person be test too soon after become infect , the test can yield false - negative result .
the seroconversion window be generally about three week , but in some case , - pron - can be more than two month .
in addition to false negative , false positive can also occur , usually due to previous infection with other virus that induce cross - react antibody .
the false - positive rate depend on the particular brand of test use , but zero  .  five % be not unusual . [ one  zero ] because of the possibility of a false positive , all positive test be follow up with a confirmatory test .
this confirmatory test be often an immunoblot ( western blot ) in which hiv peptide from the patient 's blood be identify use an hiv - specific mab - enzyme conjugate .
a positive western blot would confirm an hiv infection and a negative blot would confirm the absence of hiv despite the positive elisa .
unfortunately , western blot for hiv antigen often yield indeterminant result , in which case , - pron - neither confirm nor invalidate the result of the indirect elisa .
in fact , the rate of indeterminant can be one  zero – four  nine % ( which be why , combine with - pron - cost , western blot be not use for screening ) .
similar to the indirect elisa , an indeterminant western blot can occur because of cross - reactivity or previous viral infection , vaccination , clinical focus chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response eight  nine  seven or autoimmune disease .

of the one  three  zero  zero patient be test , how many false - positive elisa test would be expect ?

of the false positive , how many indeterminant western blot could be expect ?

how would the hospital address any case in which a patient 's western blot be indeterminant ?
jump to the previous clinical focus box .
jump to the next clinical focus box .
two  zero  .  five
fluorescent antibody techniques learning objectives
 describe the benefit of immunofluorescent antibody assay in comparison to nonfluorescent assay
 compare direct and indirect fluorescent antibody assay
 explain how a flow cytometer can be use to quantify specific subset of cell present in a complex mixture of cell type 
explain how a fluorescence - activate cell sorter can be use to separate unique type of cell
rapid visualization of bacteria from a clinical sample such as a throat swab or sputum can be achieve through fluorescent antibody ( fa ) technique that attach a fluorescent marker ( fluorogen ) to the constant region of an antibody , result in a reporter molecule that be quick to use , easy to see or measure , and able to bind to target marker with high specificity .
- pron - can also label cell , allow - pron - to precisely quantify particular subset of cell or even purify these subset for further research .
as with the enzyme assay , fa method may be direct , in which a label mab bind an antigen , or indirect , in which secondary polyclonal antibody bind patient antibody that react to a prepared antigen .
application of these two method be demonstrate in figure two  .  one  nine .
fa method be also use in automate cell counting and sort system to enumerate or segregate label subpopulation of cell in a sample .
direct fluorescent antibody techniques direct fluorescent antibody ( dfa )
test use a fluorescently label mab to bind and illuminate a target antigen .
dfa test be particularly useful for the rapid diagnosis of bacterial disease .
for example , fluorescence - label antibody against streptococcus pyogene ( group a strep ) can be use to obtain a diagnosis of strep throat from a throat swab .
the diagnosis be ready in a matter of minute , and the patient can be start on antibiotic before even leave the clinic .
dfa technique may also be use to diagnose pneumonia cause by mycoplasma pneumoniae or legionella pneumophila from sputum sample ( figure two  zero  .  two  eight ) .
the fluorescent antibody bind to the bacteria on a microscope slide , allow ready detection of the bacteria use a fluorescence microscope .
thus , the dfa technique be valuable for visualize certain bacteria that be difficult to isolate or culture from patient sample .
one  zero .
thomas , justin g . , victor jaffe , judith shaffer , and jose abreu , “ hiv testing 
us recommendations two  zero  one  four , " osteopathic family physician six ,
no .
six ( two  zero  one  four ) .
eight  nine  eight chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two  eight
a green fluorescent mab against l . pneumophila be use here to visualize and identify bacteria from a smear of a sample from the respiratory tract of a pneumonia patient .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) watch the animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two dirfluorant ) on this page to review the procedure of the direct fluorescent antibody test .

in a direct fluorescent antibody test , what do the fluorescent antibody bind to ?
indirect
fluorescent antibody technique indirect fluorescent antibody ( ifa ) test ( figure two  zero  .  two  nine ) be use to look for antibody in patient serum .
for example , an ifa test for the diagnosis of syphilis use t . pallidum cell isolate from a lab animal ( the bacteria can not be grow on lab medium ) and a smear prepare on a glass slide .
patient serum be spread over the smear and anti - treponemal antibody , if present , be allow to bind .
the serum be wash off and a secondary antibody add .
the secondary antibody be an antihuman immunoglobulin conjugate to a fluorogen .
on examination , the t . pallidum bacteria will only be visible if - pron - have be bind by the antibody from the patient 's serum .
the ifa test for syphilis provide an important complement to the vdrl test discuss in detect antigen -
antibody complexes .
the vdrl be more likely to generate false - positive reaction than the ifa test  however , the vdrl be a well test for determine whether an infection be currently active .
ifa test be also useful for the diagnosis of autoimmune disease .
for example , systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) ( see autoimmune disorders ) be characterize by elevate expression level of antinuclear antibody ( ana ) .
these autoantibody can be express against a variety of dna - bind protein and even against dna - pron - .
because autoimmunity be often difficult to diagnose , especially early in disease progression , test for ana can be link to learning chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
eight  nine  nine a valuable clue in make a diagnosis and start appropriate treatment .
the ifa for ana begin by fix cell grow in culture to a glass slide and make - pron - permeable to antibody .
the slide be then incubate with serial dilution of serum from the patient .
after incubation , the slide be wash to remove unbound protein , and the fluorescent antibody ( antihuman igg conjugate to a fluorogen ) add .
after an incubation and wash , the cell can be examine for fluorescence evident around the nucleus ( figure two  zero  .  three  zero ) .
the titer of ana in the serum be determine by the high dilution show fluorescence .
because many healthy people express ana , the american college of rheumatology recommend that the titer must be at least one   four  zero in the presence of symptom involve two or more organ system to be consider indicative of sle . [ one  one ]
one  one .
gill , james m . , anna m . quisel , peter v . rocca , and dene t . walters .
“
diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus .
" american family physician six  eight , no . one  one
( two  zero  zero  three ) 
two  one  seven  nine - two  one  eight  six .
nine  zero  zero chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  two  nine ( a )
the ifa test be use to detect antigen - specific antibody by allow - pron - to bind to antigen fix to a surface and then illuminate these complex with a secondary antibody - fluorogen conjugate .
( b )
in this example of a micrograph of an indirect fluorescent antibody test , a patient 's antibody to the measle virus bind to viral antigen present on inactivate measle - infect cell affix to a slide .
secondary antibody bind the patient 's antibody and carry a fluorescent molecule .
( credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology ) chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response nine  zero  one figure
two  zero  .  three  zero
in this test for antinuclear antibody ( ana ) , cell be expose to serum from a patient suspect of make ana and then to a fluorescent mab specific for human immunoglobulin .
as a control , serum from a healthy patient be also use .
visible fluorescence around the nucleus demonstrate the presence of ana in the patient 's serum .
in the healthy control where low level of ana be produce , very faint green be detect .
( credit leave , right 
modification of work by al - hussaini aa , alzahrani md , alenizi as , suliman nm , khan ma , alharbi sa , chentoufi aa )

in an indirect fluorescent antibody test , what do the fluorescent antibody bind to ?

what be the ana test look for ?
flow cytometry fluorescently label antibody can be use to quantify cell of a specific type in a complex mixture use flow cytometry ( figure two  zero  .  three  one ) , an automate , cell - count system that detect fluoresce cell as - pron - pass through a narrow tube one cell at a time .
for example , in hiv infection , - pron - be important to know the level of cd four t cell in the patient 's blood  if the number fall below five  zero  zero per μl of blood , the patient become more likely to acquire opportunistic infection  below two  zero  zero per μl , the patient can no longer mount a useful adaptive immune response at all .
the analysis begin by incubate a mixed - cell population ( e . g . , white blood cell from a donor ) with a fluorescently label mab specific for a subpopulation of cell ( e . g . , anti - cd four ) .
some experiment look at two cell marker simultaneously by add a different fluorogen to the appropriate mab .
the cell be then introduce to the flow cytometer through a narrow capillary that force the cell to pass in single file .
a laser be use to activate the fluorogen .
the fluorescent light radiate out in all direction , so the fluorescence detector can be position at an angle from the incident laser light .
figure two  zero  .  three  one show the obscuration bar in front of the forward - scatter detector that prevent laser light from hit the detector .
as a cell pass through the laser bar , the forward - scatter detector detect light scatter around the obscuration bar .
the scatter light be transform into a voltage pulse , and the cytometer count a cell .
the fluorescence from a label cell be detect by the side - scatter detector .
the light pass through various dichroic mirror such that the light emit from the fluorophore be receive by the correct detector .
nine  zero  two chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  zero  .  three  one
in flow cytometry , a mixture of fluorescently label and unlabeled cell pass through a narrow capillary .
a laser excite the fluorogen , and the fluorescence intensity of each cell be measure by a detector .
( credit  modification of work by “ kierano” / wikimedia commons )
data be collect from both the forward - and side - scatter detector .
one way these datum can be present be in the form of a histogram .
the forward scatter be place on the y - axis ( to represent the number of cell ) , and the side scatter be place on the x - axis ( to represent the fluoresence of each cell ) .
the scaling for the x - axis be logarithmic , so fluorescence intensity increase by a factor of one  zero with each unit increase along the axis .
figure two  zero  .  three  two depict an example in which a culture of cell be combine with an antibody attach to a fluorophore to detect cd eight cell and then analyze by flow cytometry .
the histogram have two peak .
the peak on the left have low fluorescence reading , represent the subset of the cell population ( approximately three  zero cell ) that do not fluoresce  hence , - pron - be not bind by antibody and therefore do not express cd eight .
the peak on the right have high fluorescence reading , represent the subset of the cell population ( approximately one  zero  zero cell ) that show fluorescence  hence , - pron - be bind by the antibody and therefore do express cd eight .
chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response nine  zero  three figure two  zero  .  three  two flow cytometry datum be often compile as a histogram .
in the histogram , the area under each peak be proportional to the number of cell in each population .
the x - axis be the relative fluorescence express by the cell ( on a log scale ) , and the y - axis represent the number of cell at a particular level of fluorescence .

what be the purpose of the laser in a flow cytometer ?

in the output from a flow cytometer , the area under the histogram be equivalent to what ?
resolution
after notify all one  three  zero  zero patient , the hospital begin schedule hiv screening .
appointment be schedule a minimum of three week after the patient 's last hospital visit to minimize the risk of false negative .
because some false positive be anticipate , the public health physician set up a counseling protocol for any patient whose indirect elisa come back positive .
of the one  three  zero  zero patient , eight test positive use the elisa .
five of these test be invalidate by negative western blot test , but one western blot come back positive , confirm that the patient have indeed contract hiv .
the two remain western blot come back indeterminate .
these individual have to submit to a third test , a pcr , to confirm the presence or absence of hiv sequence .
luckily , both patient test negative .
as for the lone patient confirm to have hiv , the test can not prove or disprove any connection to the syrinx compromise by the former hospital employee .
even so , the hospital 's insurance will fully cover the patient 's treatment , which begin immediately .
although - pron - now have drug that be typically effective at control the progression of hiv and aids , there be still no cure .
if leave untreated , or if the drug regimen fail , the patient will experience a gradual decline in the number of cd four helper t cell , result in severe impairment of all adaptive immune function .
even moderate decline of helper t cell number can result in immunodeficiency , leave the patient susceptible to opportunistic infection .
to monitor the status of the patient 's helper t cell , the hospital will use flow cytometry .
this sensitive test allow physician to precisely determine the number of helper t cell so - pron - can adjust treatment if the number fall below five  zero  zero cell / μl . jump to the previous clinical focus box .
clinical focus nine  zero  four chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cell sorting use immunofluorescence
the flow cytometer and immunofluorescence can also be modify to sort cell from a single sample into purified subpopulation of cell for research purpose .
this modification of the flow cytometer be call a fluorescenceactivate cell sorter ( facs ) .
in a facs , fluorescence by a cell induce the device to put a charge on a droplet of the transport fluid contain that cell .
the charge be specific to the wavelength of the fluorescent light , which allow for differential sorting by those different charge .
the sorting be accomplish by an electrostatic deflector that move the charge droplet contain the cell into one collect vessel or another .
the process result in highly purified subpopulation of cell .
one limitation of a facs be that - pron - only work on isolated cell .
thus , the method would work in sort white blood cell , since - pron - exist as isolated cell .
but for cell in a tissue , flow cytometry can only be apply if - pron - can excise the tissue and separate - pron - into single cell ( use protease to cleave cell - cell adhesion molecule ) without disrupt cell integrity .
this method may be use on tumor , but more often , immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry be use to study cell in tissue .
watch video to learn more about how flow cytometry ( https / / openstax . org / l / two  two flowcytometry ) and a facs ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two facswork ) work .

in fluorescence activate cell sorting , what characteristic of the target cell allow - pron - to be separate ?
table two  zero  .  five compare the mechanism of the fluorescent antibody technique discuss in this section .
fluorescent antibody techniques type of assay mechanism examples direct fluorescent antibody
( dfa ) use fluorogen - antibody conjugate to label bacteria from patient sample visualizing legionella pneumophila from a throat swab indirect fluorescent antibody ( ifa )
detect disease - specific antibody in patent serum diagnosing syphilis  detect antinuclear antibody ( ana ) for lupus and other autoimmune disease flow cytometry labels cell membrane with fluorogen - antibody conjugate marker excite by a laser  machine count the cell and record the relative fluorescence
count the number of fluorescently label cd four or cd eight cell in a sample table two  zero  .  five link to learning chapter two  zero  laboratory analysis of the immune response nine  zero  five fluorescent antibody techniques type of assay mechanism examples fluorescence
activate cell sorter ( facs ) form of flow cytometry that both count cell and physically separate - pron - into pool of high and low fluorescence cell sort cancer cell
table two  zero  .  five summary two  zero  .  one polyclonal and monoclonal antibody production  antibodies bind with high specificity to antigen use to challenge the immune system , but - pron - may also show cross - reactivity by bind to other antigen that share chemical property with the original antigen .

injection of an antigen into an animal will result in a polyclonal antibody response in which different antibody be produce that react with the various epitope on the antigen .
 polyclonal antisera be useful for some type of laboratory assay , but other assay require more specificity .
diagnostic test that use polyclonal antisera be typically only use for screening because of the possibility of false - positive and false - negative result .
 monoclonal antibody provide high specificity than polyclonal antisera because - pron - bind to a single epitope and usually have high affinity .

monoclonal antibody be typically produce by culture antibody - secrete hybridoma derive from mouse .
mab be currently use to treat cancer , but - pron - exorbitant cost have prevent - pron - from be use more widely to treat infectious disease .
still , - pron - potential for laboratory and clinical use be drive the development of new , cost - effective solution such as plantibodie .
two  zero  .  two
detecting antigen - antibody complexes

when present in the correct ratio , antibody and antigen will form a precipitin , or lattice that precipitate out of solution .

a precipitin ring test can be use to visualize lattice formation in solution .
the ouchterlony assay demonstrate lattice formation in a gel .
the radial immunodiffusion assay be use to quantify antigen by measure the size of a precipitation zone in a gel infuse with antibody .

insoluble antigen in suspension will form flocculant when bind by antibody .
this be the basis of the vdrl test for syphilis in which anti - treponemal antibody bind to cardiolipin in suspension .
 viral infection can be detect by quantify virus - neutralize antibody in a patient 's serum .

different antibody class in plasma or serum be identify by use immunoelectrophoresis .

the presence of specific antigen ( e . g . , bacterial or viral protein ) in serum can be demonstrate by western blot assay , in which the protein be transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane and identify use label antibody .

in the complement fixation test , complement be use to detect antibody against various pathogen .
two  zero  .  three agglutination assays  antibodies can agglutinate cell or large particle into a visible matrix .
agglutination test be often do on card or in microtiter plate that allow multiple reaction to take place side by side use small volume of reagent .

use antisera against certain protein allow identification of serovar within specie of bacteria .

detecting antibody against a pathogen can be a powerful tool for diagnose disease , but there be a period of time before patient go through seroconversion and the level of antibody become detectable .
nine  zero  six chapter two  zero
 laboratory analysis of the immune response
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  agglutination of latex bead in indirect agglutination assay can be use to detect the presence of specific antigen or specific antibody in patient serum .

the presence of some antibacterial and antiviral antibody can be confirm by the use of the direct coombs ' test , which use coombs ' reagent to cross - link antibody bind to red blood cell and facilitate hemagglutination .

some virus and bacteria will bind and agglutinate red blood cell  this interaction be the basis of the direct hemagglutination assay , most often use to determine the titer of virus in solution .

neutralization assay quantify the level of virus - specific antibody by measure the decrease in hemagglutination observe after mix patient serum with a standardized amount of virus .

hemagglutination assay be also use to screen and cross - match donor and recipient blood to ensure that the transfusion recipient do not have antibody to antigen in the donate blood .
two  zero  .  four eia and elisas 
enzyme immunoassay
( eia ) be use to visualize and quantify antigen .
- pron - use an antibody conjugate to an enzyme to bind the antigen , and the enzyme convert a substrate into an observable end product .
the substrate may be either a chromogen or a fluorogen .

immunostaining be an eia technique for visualize cell in a tissue ( immunohistochemistry ) or examine intracellular structure ( immunocytochemistry ) .

direct elisa be use to quantify an antigen in solution .
the primary antibody capture the antigen , and the secondary antibody deliver an enzyme .
production of end product from the chromogenic substrate be directly proportional to the amount of capture antigen .

indirect elisa be use to detect antibody in patient serum by attach antigen to the well of a microtiter plate , allow the patient ( primary ) antibody to bind the antigen and an enzyme - conjugate secondary antibody to detect the primary antibody .

immunofiltration and immunochromatographic assay be use in lateral flow test , which can be use to diagnose pregnancy and various disease by detect color - label antigen - antibody complex in urine or other fluid sample two  zero  .  five fluorescent antibody techniques

immunofluorescence assay use antibody - fluorogen conjugate to illuminate antigen for easy , rapid detection .
 direct immunofluorescence can be use to detect the presence of bacteria in clinical sample such as sputum .

indirect immunofluorescence detect the presence of antigen - specific antibody in patient sera .
the fluorescent antibody bind to the antigen - specific antibody rather than the antigen .

the use of indirect immunofluorescence assay to detect antinuclear antibody be an important tool in the diagnosis of several autoimmune disease .
 flow cytometry use fluorescent mabs against cell - membrane protein to quantify specific subset of cell in complex mixture .

fluorescence - activate cell sorter be an extension of flow cytometry in which fluorescence intensity be use to physically separate cell into high and low fluorescence population .
chapter two  one skin and eye infections figure two  one  .  one
the skin be an important barrier to pathogen , but - pron - can also develop infection .
these raise lesion ( leave ) be typical of folliculitis , a condition that result from the inflammation of hair follicle .
acne lesion ( right ) also result from inflammation of hair follicle .
in this case , the inflammation result when hair follicle become clog with complex lipid , fatty acid , and dead skin cell , produce a favorable environment for bacteria .
chapter outline two  one  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and
eye two  one  .  two bacterial infections of the skin and eye two  one  .  three viral infections of the skin and eye two  one  .  four mycoses of the skin
two  one  .  five protozoan and helminthic infections of the skin and eye introduction
the human body be cover in skin , and like most covering , skin be design to protect what be underneath .
one of - pron - primary purpose be to prevent microbe in the surround environment from invade underlie tissue and organ .
but in spite of - pron - role as a protective covering , skin be not - pron - immune from infection .
certain pathogen and toxin can cause severe infection or reaction when - pron - come in contact with the skin .
other pathogen be opportunistic , breach the skin 's natural defense through cut , wound , or a disruption of normal microbiota result in an infection in the surround skin and tissue .
still other pathogen enter the body via different route - through the respiratory or digestive system , for example - but cause reaction that manifest as skin rash or lesion .
nearly all human experience skin infection to some degree .
many of these condition be , as the name suggest , “ skin deep , " with symptom that be local and non - life - threaten .
at some point , almost everyone must endure condition like acne , athlete 's foot , and minor infection of cut and abrasion , all of which result from infection of the skin .
but not all skin infection be quite so innocuous .
some can become invasive , lead to systemic infection or spread over large area of skin , potentially become life - threaten .
two  one  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and chapter two  one
 skin and eye infections
nine  one  three eyes learning objectives
 describe the major anatomical feature of the skin and eye 
compare and contrast the microbiome of various body site , such as the hand , back , foot , and eye 
explain how microorganism overcome defense of skin and eye in order to cause infection 
describe general sign and symptom of disease associate with infection of the skin and eye human skin be an important part of the innate immune system .
in addition to serve a wide range of other function , the skin serve as an important barrier to microbial invasion .
not only be - pron - a physical barrier to penetration of deep tissue by potential pathogen , but - pron - also provide an inhospitable environment for the growth of many pathogen .
in this section , - pron - will provide a brief overview of the anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and eye , along with general symptom associate with skin and eye infection .
layer of the skin human skin be make up of several layer and sublayer .
the two main layer be the epidermis and the dermis .
these layer cover a third layer of tissue call the hypodermis , which consist of fibrous and adipose connective tissue ( figure two  one  .  two ) .
the epidermis be the outermost layer of the skin , and - pron - be relatively thin .
the exterior surface of the epidermis , call the stratum corneum , primarily consist of dead skin cell .
this layer of dead cell limit direct contact between the outside world and live cell .
the stratum corneum be rich in keratin , a tough , fibrous protein that be also find in hair and nail .
keratin help make the outer surface of the skin relatively tough and waterproof .
- pron - also help to keep the surface of the skin dry , which reduce microbial growth .
however , some microbe be still able to live on the surface of the skin , and some of these can be shed with dead skin cell in the process of desquamation , which be the shedding and peeling of skin that occur as a normal process but that may be accelerate when infection be present .
beneath the epidermis lie a thick skin layer call the dermis .
the dermis contain connective tissue and embed structure such as blood vessel , nerve , and muscle .
structure call hair follicle ( from which hair grow ) be locate within the dermis , even though much of - pron - structure consist of epidermal tissue .
the dermis also contain the two major type of gland find in human skin  sweat gland ( tubular gland that produce sweat ) and sebaceous gland ( which be associate with hair follicle and produce sebum , a lipid - rich substance contain protein and mineral ) .
perspiration ( sweat ) provide some moisture to the epidermis , which can increase the potential for microbial growth .
for this reason , more microbe be find on the region of the skin that produce the most sweat , such as the skin part one sam , a college freshman with a bad habit of oversleep , nick - pron - shave in a rush to get to class on time .
at the time , - pron - do not think twice about - pron - .
but two day later , - pron - notice the cut be surround by a reddish area of skin that be warm to the touch .
when the wound start ooze pus , - pron - decide - pron - have well stop by the university 's clinic .
the doctor take a sample from the lesion and then clean the area .

what type of microbe could be responsible for sam 's infection ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus nine  one  four chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five of the underarm and groin .
however , in addition to water , sweat also contain substance that inhibit microbial growth , such as salt , lysozyme , and antimicrobial peptide .
sebum also serve to protect the skin and reduce water loss .
although some of the lipid and fatty acid in sebum inhibit microbial growth , sebum contain compound that provide nutrition for certain microbe .
figure two  one  .  two ( a )
a micrograph of a section through human skin show the epidermis and dermis .
( b )
the major layer of human skin be the epidermis , dermis , and hypodermis .
( credit b  modification of work by national cancer institute )

how do desquamation help with prevent infection ?
normal microbiota of the skin
the skin be home to a wide variety of normal microbiota , consist of commensal organism that derive nutrition from skin cell and secretion such as sweat and sebum .
the normal microbiota of skin tend to inhibit transientmicrobe colonization by produce antimicrobial substance and outcompete other microbe that land on the surface of the skin .
this help to protect the skin from pathogenic infection .
the skin 's property differ from one region of the body to another , as do the composition of the skin 's microbiota .
the availability of nutrient and moisture partly dictate which microorganism will thrive in a particular region of the skin .
relatively moist skin , such as that of the naris ( nostril ) and underarm , have a much different microbiota than the dryer skin on the arm , leg , hand , and top of the foot .
some area of the skin have high density of sebaceous gland .
these sebum - rich area , which include the back , the fold at the side of the nose , and the back of the neck , harbor distinct microbial community that be less diverse than those find on other part of the body .
different type of bacteria dominate the dry , moist , and sebum - rich region of the skin .
the most abundant microbe typically find in the dry and sebaceous region be betaproteobacteria and propionibacteria , respectively .
in the chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  one  five moist region , corynebacterium and staphylococcus be most commonly find ( figure two  one  .  three ) .
virus and fungus be also find on the skin , with malassezia be the most common type of fungus find as part of the normal microbiota .
the role and population of virus in the microbiota , know as virome , be still not well understand , and there be limitation to the technique use to identify - pron - .
however , circoviridae , papillomaviridae , and polyomaviridae appear to be the most common resident in the healthy skin virome . [ one ][ two ][ three ] figure two  one  .  three
the normal microbiota vary on different region of the skin , especially in dry versus moist area .
the figure show the major organism commonly find in different location of a healthy individual 's skin and external mucosa .
note that there be significant variation among individual .
( credit  modification of work by national human genome research institute )

what be the four most common bacteria that be part of the normal skin microbiota ?
infection of the skin
while the microbiota of the skin can play a protective role , - pron - can also cause harm in certain case .
often , an opportunistic pathogen reside in the skin microbiota of one individual may be transmit to another individual more susceptible to an infection .
for example , methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus ( mrsa ) can often take up one .
belkaid , y . , and j . a . segre .
“ dialogue between skin microbiota and immunity , ” science three  four  six ( two  zero  one  four ) six  two  one  two   nine  five  four – nine  five  nine .
two .
foulongne , vincent , et al .
“
human skin
microbiota  high diversity of dna virus identify on the human skin by high throughput sequencing .
" plos one ( two  zero  one  two ) seven  (  six ) 
e three  eight  four  nine  nine .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  three  seven  one  / journal . pone .  zero  zero  three  eight  four  nine  nine .
three .
robinson , c . m . , and j . k . pfeiffer .
“
viruses and the microbiota .
" annual review of virology
( two  zero  one  four
) one   five  five – five  nine .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  one  four  six  / annurevvirology - zero  three  one  four  one  three - zero  eight  five  five  five  zero .
nine  one  six chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five residence in the naris of health care worker and hospital patient  though harmless on intact , healthy skin , mrsa can cause infection if introduce into other part of the body , as may occur during surgery or via a post - surgical incision or wound .
this be one reason why clean surgical site be so important .
injury or damage to the skin can allow microbe to enter deep tissue , where nutrient be more abundant and the environment be more conducive to bacterial growth .
wound infection be common after a puncture or laceration that damage the physical barrier of the skin .
microbe may infect structure in the dermis , such as hair follicle and gland , cause a localized infection , or - pron - may reach the bloodstream , which can lead to a systemic infection .
in some case , infectious microbe can cause a variety of rash or lesion that differ in - pron - physical characteristic .
these rash can be the result of inflammation reaction or direct response to toxin produce by the microbe .
table two  one  .  one list some of the medical terminology use to describe skin lesion and rash base on - pron - characteristic 
figure two  one  .  four and figure two  one  .  five illustrate some of the various type of skin lesion .
- pron - be important to note that many different disease can lead to skin condition of very similar appearance  thus the term use in the table be generally not exclusive to a particular type of infection or disease .
some medical term associate with skin lesions and rashes term definition abscess localize collection of pus bulla ( pl . , bullae ) fluid - fill blister no more than five mm in diameter carbuncle deep , pus - fill abscess generally form from multiple furuncle crust dry fluid from a lesion on the surface of the skin cyst encapsulate sac fill with fluid , semi - solid matter , or gas , typically locate just below the upper layer of skin folliculitis a localize rash due to inflammation of hair follicle furuncle ( boil ) pu - fill abscess due to infection of a hair follicle macule smooth spot of discoloration on the skin papule small raise bump on the skin pseudocyst lesion that resemble a cyst but with a less defined boundary purulent pus - produce  suppurative pustule fluid - or pu - fill bump on the skin pyoderma any suppurative ( pus - produce ) infection of the skin suppurative produce pus  purulent ulcer break in the skin  open sore vesicle small , fluid - fill lesion wheal swollen , inflamed skin that itch or burn , such as from an insect bite table two  one  .  one chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  one  seven figure two  one  .  four ( a ) acne be a bacterial infection of the skin that manifest as a rash of inflame hair follicle ( folliculitis ) .
the large whitehead near the center of the cheek be an infected hair follicle that have become purulent ( or suppurative ) , lead to the formation of a furuncle .
( b )
an abscess be a pus - fill lesion .
( credit b  modification of work by bruce blaus ) figure two  one  .  five
numerous cause can lead to skin lesion of various type , some of which be very similar in appearance .
( credit  modification of work by bruce blaus )

how can asymptomatic health care worker transmit bacteria such as mrsa to patient ?
anatomy and microbiota of the eye
although the eye and skin have distinct anatomy , - pron - be both in direct contact with the external environment .
an important component of the eye be the nasolacrimal drainage system , which serve as a conduit for the fluid of the eye , call tear .
tear flow from the external eye to the nasal cavity by the lacrimal apparatus , which be compose of nine  one  eight chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the structure involve in tear production ( figure two  one  .  six ) .
the lacrimal gland , above the eye , secrete tear to keep the eye moist .
there be two small opening , one on the inside edge of the upper eyelid and one on the inside edge of the lower eyelid , near the nose .
each of these opening be call a lacrimal punctum .
together , these lacrimal puncta collect tear from the eye that be then convey through lacrimal duct to a reservoir for tear call the lacrimal sac , also know as the dacrocyst or tear sac .
from the sac , tear fluid flow via a nasolacrimal duct to the inner nose .
each nasolacrimal duct be locate underneath the skin and pass through the bone of the face into the nose .
chemical in tear , such as defensin , lactoferrin , and lysozyme , help to prevent colonization by pathogen .
in addition , mucin facilitate removal of microbe from the surface of the eye .
figure two  one  .  six
the lacrimal apparatus include the structure of the eye associate with tear production and drainage .
( credit  modification of work by
“ evidence base medical educator inc . ” / youtube )
the surface of the eyeball and inner eyelid be mucous membrane call conjunctiva .
the normal conjunctival microbiota have not be well characterize , but do exist .
one small study ( part of the ocular microbiome project ) find twelve genera that be consistently present in the conjunctiva . [ four ]
these microbe be think to help defend the membrane against pathogen .
however , - pron - be still unclear which microbe may be transient and which may form a stable microbiota . [ five ] use of contact lense can cause change in the normal microbiota of the conjunctiva by introduce another surface into the natural anatomy of the eye .
research be currently underway to better understand how contact lense may impact the normal microbiota and contribute to eye disease .
the watery material inside of the eyeball be call the vitreous humor .
unlike the conjunctiva , - pron - be protect from contact with the environment and be almost always sterile , with no normal microbiota ( figure two  one  .  seven ) .
four .
abelson , m . b . , lane , k . , and slocum , c . .
“
the secrets of ocular microbiomes .
”
review of ophthalmology june eight , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . reviewofophthalmology . com / content / t / ocular_disease / c /  five  five  one  seven  eight .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
five .
shaikh - lesko , r . “
visualize the ocular microbiome .
"
the scientist may one  two , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . the - scientist . com / ? articles . view / articleno /  three  nine  nine  four  five  / title / visualizing - the - ocular - microbiome .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  one  nine figure two  one  .  seven
some microbe live on the conjunctiva of the human eye , but the vitreous humor be sterile .
infection of the eye
the conjunctiva be a frequent site of infection of the eye  like other mucous membrane , - pron - be also a common portal of entry for pathogen .
inflammation of the conjunctiva be call conjunctivitis , although - pron - be commonly know as pinkeye because of the pink appearance in the eye .
infection of deep structure , beneath the cornea , be less common ( figure two  one  .  eight ) .
conjunctivitis occur in multiple form .
- pron - may be acute or chronic .
acute purulent conjunctivitis be associate with pus formation , while acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis be associate with bleed in the conjunctiva .
the term blepharitis refer to an inflammation of the eyelid , while keratitis refer to an inflammation of the cornea ( figure two  one  .  eight )  keratoconjunctivitis be an inflammation of both the cornea and the conjunctiva , and dacryocystitis be an inflammation of the lacrimal sac that can often occur when a nasolacrimal duct be block .
figure two  one  .  eight ( a ) conjunctivitis be inflammation of the conjunctiva .
( b )
blepharitis be inflammation of the eyelid .
( c ) keratitis be inflammation of the cornea .
( credit a  modification of work by lopez - prats mj , sanz marco e , hidalgo - mora jj , garcia - delpech s , diaz - llopis m  credit b , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
infections lead to conjunctivitis , blepharitis , keratoconjunctivitis , or dacryocystitis may be cause by bacteria or virus , but allergen , pollutant , or chemical can also irritate the eye and cause inflammation of various structure .
viral infection be a more likely cause of conjunctivitis in case with symptom such as fever and watery discharge that occur with upper respiratory infection and itchy eye .
table two  one  .  two summarize some common form of conjunctivitis and blepharitis .
nine  two  zero chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five types of conjunctivities and blepharitis condition description causative agent ( s )
acute purulent conjunctivitis conjunctivitis with purulent discharge bacterial ( haemophilus , staphylococcus )
acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis involve subconjunctival hemorrhage viral ( picornaviradae )
acute ulcerative blepharitis infection involve eyelid  pustule and ulcer may develop bacterial ( staphylococcal ) or viral ( herpe simplex , varicella - zoster , etc . )
follicular conjunctivitis inflammation of the conjunctiva with nodule ( dome - shape structure that be red at the base and pale on top )
viral ( adenovirus and other )  environmental irritant dacryocystitis inflammation of the lacrimal sac often associate with a plug nasolacrimal duct bacterial ( haemophilus , staphylococcus , streptococcus )
keratitis inflammation of cornea bacterial , viral , or protozoal  environmental irritant keratoconjunctivitis inflammation of cornea and conjunctiva bacterial , viral ( adenovirus ) , or other cause ( include dryness of the eye )
nonulcerative blepharitis inflammation , irritation , redness of the eyelid without ulceration environmental irritant  allergen papillary conjunctivitis inflammation of the conjunctiva  nodule and papillae with red top develop environmental irritant  allergen table two  one  .  two

how do the lacrimal apparatus help to prevent eye infection ?
two  one  .  two bacterial infections of the skin and eyes learning objectives
 identify the most common bacterial pathogen that cause infection of the skin and eye  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the skin and eye despite the skin 's protective function , infection be common .
gram - positive staphylococcus spp .
and streptococcus spp .
be responsible for many of the most common skin infection .
however , many skin condition be not strictly associate with a single pathogen .
opportunistic pathogen of many type may infect skin wound , and individual case with identical symptom may result from different pathogen or combination of pathogen .
in this section , - pron - will examine some of the most important bacterial infection of the skin and eye and discuss how biofilm can contribute to and exacerbate such infection .
key feature of bacterial skin and eye infection be also summarize in the disease profile box throughout this section .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  two  one staphylococcal infections of the skin staphylococcus specie be commonly find on the skin , with s . epidermidis and s . homini be prevalent in the normal microbiota .
s . aureus be also commonly find in the nasal passage and on healthy skin , but pathogenic strain be often the cause of a broad range of infection of the skin and other body system .
s . aureus be quite contagious .
- pron - be spread easily through skin - to - skin contact , and because many people be chronic nasal carrier ( asymptomatic individual who carry s . aureus in - pron - naris ) , the bacteria can easily be transfer from the nose to the hand and then to fomite or other individual .
because - pron - be so contagious , s . aureus be prevalent in most community setting .
this prevalence be particularly problematic in hospital , where antibioticresistant strain of the bacteria may be present , and where immunocompromised patient may be more susceptible to infection .
resistant strain include methicillin - resistant s . aureus ( mrsa ) , which can be acquire through healthcare setting ( hospital - acquire mrsa , or ha - mrsa ) or in the community ( community - acquire mrsa , or camrsa ) .
hospital patient often arrive at health - care facility already colonize with antibiotic - resistant strain of s . aureus that can be transfer to health - care provider and other patient .
some hospital have attempt to detect these individual in order to institute prophylactic measure , but - pron - have have mix success ( see eye on ethic 
screen patient for mrsa ) .
when a staphylococcal infection develop , choice of medication be important .
as discuss above , many staphylococci ( such as mrsa ) be resistant to some or many antibiotic .
thus , antibiotic sensitivity be measure to identify the most suitable antibiotic .
however , even before receive the result of sensitivity analysis , suspect s . aureus infection be often initially treat with drug know to be effective against mrsa , such as trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole ( tmp / smz ) , clindamycin , a tetracycline ( doxycycline or minocycline ) , or linezolid .
the pathogenicity of staphylococcal infection be often enhance by characteristic chemical secrete by some strain .
staphylococcal virulence factor include hemolysin call staphylolysin , which be cytotoxic for many type of cell , include skin cell and white blood cell .
virulent strain of s . aureus be also coagulase - positive , mean - pron - produce coagulase , a plasma - clot protein that be involve in abscess formation .
- pron - may also produce leukocidin , which kill white blood cell and can contribute to the production of pus and protein a , which inhibit phagocytosis by bind to the constant region of antibody .
some virulent strain of s . aureus also produce other toxin , such as toxic shock syndrome toxin -  one
( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) .
to confirm the causative agent of a suspect staphylococcal skin infection , sample from the wound be cultured .
under the microscope , gram - positive staphylococcus specie have cellular arrangement that form grapelike cluster  when grow on blood agar , colony have a unique pigmentation range from opaque white to cream .
a catalase test be use to distinguish staphylococcus from streptococcus , which be also a genus of gram - positive cocci and a common cause of skin infection .
staphylococcus specie be catalase - positive while streptococcus specie be catalase - negative .
other test be perform on sample from the wound in order to distinguish coagulase - positive specie of staphylococcus ( cops ) such as s . aureus from common coagulase - negative specie ( cons ) such as s . epidermidis .
although cons be less likely than cops to cause human disease , - pron - can cause infection when - pron - enter the body , as can sometimes occur via catheter , indwell medical device , and wound .
passive agglutination testing can be use to distinguish cops from cons .
if the sample be coagulase - positive , the sample be generally presume to contain s . aureus .
additional genetic testing would be necessary to identify the particular strain of s . aureus .
another way to distinguish cops from cons be by culture the sample on mannitol salt agar ( msa ) .
staphylococcus specie readily grow on this medium because - pron - be tolerant of the high concentration of sodium chloride ( seven  .  five % nacl ) .
however , cops such as s . aureus ferment mannitol ( which will be evident on a msa plate ) , whereas cons such as s . epidermidis do not ferment mannitol but can be distinguish by the fermentation of other sugar such as lactose , malonate , and raffinose ( figure two  one  .  nine ) .
nine  two  two chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  one  .  nine
( a )
a mannitol salt agar plate be use to distinguish different specie of staphylococci .
in this plate , s . aureus be on the left and s . epidermidis be in the right .
because s . aureus be capable of ferment mannitol , - pron - produce acid that cause the color to change to yellow .
( b )
this scan electron micrograph show the characteristic grapelike cluster of s . aureus .
( credit a  modification of work by “ scienceprofonline” / youtube  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
screen patient for mrsa
accord to the cdc , eight  six % of invasive mrsa infection be associate in some way with healthcare , as oppose to be community - acquire .
in hospital and clinic , asymptomatic patient who harbor mrsa may spread the bacteria to individual who be more susceptible to serious illness .
in an attempt to control the spread of mrsa , hospital have try screen patient for mrsa .
if patient test positive follow a nasal swab test , - pron - can undergo decolonization use chlorhexidine wash or intranasal mupirocin .
some study have report substantial reduction in mrsa disease follow implementation of these protocol , while other have not .
this be partly because there be no standard protocol for these procedure .
several different mrsa identification test may be use , some involve slow culture technique and other rapid testing .
other factor , such as the effectiveness of general hand - washing protocol , may also play a role in help to prevent mrsa transmission .
there be still other question that need to be address  how frequently should patient be screen ?
which individual should be test ?
from where on the body should sample be collect ?
will increase resistance develop from the decolonization procedure ?
even if identification and decolonization procedure be perfect , ethical question will remain .
should patient have the right to decline testing ?
should a patient who test positive for mrsa have the right to decline the decolonization procedure , and if so , should hospital have the right to refuse treatment to the patient ?
how do - pron - balance the individual
's right to receive care with the right of other patient who could be expose to disease as a result ?
superficial staphylococcal infections s . aureus be often associate with pyoderma , skin infection that be purulent .
pus formation occur because many eye on ethics chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  two  three strain of s . aureus produce leukocidin , which kill white blood cell .
these purulent skin infection may initially manifest as folliculitis , but can lead to furuncle or deep abscess call carbuncle .
folliculitis generally present as bump and pimple that may be itchy , red , and / or pus - fill .
in some case , folliculitis be self - limit , but if - pron - continue for more than a few day , worsen , or return repeatedly , - pron - may require medical treatment .
sweat , skin injury , ingrown hair , tight clothing , irritation from shave , and skin condition can all contribute to folliculitis .
avoidance of tight clothing and skin irritation can help to prevent infection , but topical antibiotic ( and sometimes other treatment ) may also help .
folliculitis can be identify by skin inspection  treatment be generally start without first culture and identify the causative agent .
in contrast , furuncle ( boil ) be deep infection ( figure two  one  .  one  zero ) .
- pron - be most common in those individual ( especially young adult and teenager ) who play contact sport , share athletic equipment , have poor nutrition , live in close quarter , or have weaken immune system .
good hygiene and skin care can often help to prevent furuncle from become more infective , and - pron - generally resolve on - pron - own .
however , if furuncle spread , increase in number or size , or lead to systemic symptom such as fever and chill , then medical care be need .
- pron - may sometimes need to be drain ( at which time the pathogen can be culture ) and treat with antibiotic .
when multiple boil develop into a deep lesion , - pron - be call a carbuncle ( figure two  one  .  one  zero ) .
because carbuncle be deep , - pron - be more commonly associate with systemic symptom and a general feeling of illness .
large , recurrent , or worsen carbuncle require medical treatment , as do those associate with sign of illness such as fever .
carbuncles generally need to be drain and treat with antibiotic .
while carbuncle be relatively easy to identify visually , culturing and laboratory analysis of the wound may be recommend for some infection because antibiotic resistance be relatively common .
proper hygiene be important to prevent these type of skin infection or to prevent the progression of exist infection .
figure two  one  .  one  zero furuncles ( boil ) and
carbuncle be infection of the skin often cause by staphylococcus bacteria .
( a )
a furuncle contain pu and exhibit swell .
( b )
a carbuncle be a pus - fill lesion that be typically deep than the furuncle .
- pron - often form from multiple furuncle .
( credit a  modification of work by “ mahdouch” / wikimedia commons  credit b  modification of work by “ drvgaikwad” / wikimedia commons )
staphylococcal scald skin syndrome ( ssss ) be another superficial infection cause by s . aureus that be most commonly see in young child , especially infant .
bacterial exotoxin first produce erythema ( redness of the skin ) and then severe peeling of the skin , as may occur after scald ( figure two  one  .  one  one ) .
ssss be diagnose by examine characteristic of the skin ( which may rub off easily ) , use blood test to check for elevated white blood cell count , culturing , and other method .
intravenous antibiotic and fluid therapy be use as treatment .
nine  two  four chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
two  one  .  one  one a newborn with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome ( ssss ) , which result in large region of peeling , dead skin .
( credit  modification of work by d jeyakumari , r gopal , m eswaran , and
c maheshkumar )
impetigo
the skin infection impetigo cause the formation of vesicle , pustule , and possibly bullae , often around the nose and mouth .
bullae be large , fluid - fill blister that measure at least five mm in diameter .
impetigo can be diagnose as either nonbullous or bullous .
in nonbullous impetigo , vesicle and pustule rupture and become encrusted sore .
typically the crust be yellowish , often with exudate drain from the base of the lesion .
in bullous impetigo , the bullae fill and rupture , result in large , drain , encrust lesion ( figure two  one  .  one  two ) .
especially common in child , impetigo be particularly concern because - pron - be highly contagious .
impetigo can be cause by s . aureus alone , by streptococcus pyogene alone , or by coinfection of s . aureus and s . pyogene .
impetigo be often diagnose through observation of - pron - characteristic appearance , although culture and susceptibility testing may also be use .
topical or oral antibiotic treatment be typically effective in treat most case of impetigo .
however , case cause by s . pyogene can lead to serious sequelae ( pathological condition result from infection , disease , injury , therapy , or other trauma ) such as acute glomerulonephritis ( agn ) , which be severe inflammation in the kidney .
figure two  one  .  one  two impetigo be characterize by vesicle , pustule , or bullae that rupture , produce encrust sore .
( credit  modification of work by fda )
nosocomial s . epidermidis infections
though not as virulent as s . aureus , the staphylococcus s . epidermidis can cause serious opportunistic infection .
such infection usually occur only in hospital setting .
s . epidermidis be usually a harmless resident of the normal chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
nine  two  five skin microbiota .
however , health - care worker can inadvertently transfer s . epidermidis to medical device that be insert into the body , such as catheter , prosthesis , and indwell medical device .
once - pron - have bypass the skin barrier , s . epidermidis can cause infection inside the body that can be difficult to treat .
like s . aureus , s . epidermidis be resistant to many antibiotic , and localized infection can become systemic if not treat quickly .
to reduce the risk of nosocomial ( hospital - acquire ) s . epidermidis , health - care worker must follow strict procedure for handle and sterilize medical device before and during surgical procedure .

why be staphylococcus aureus infection often purulent ?
streptococcal infections of the skin streptococcus be gram - positive cocci with a microscopic morphology that resemble chain of bacteria .
colony be typically small ( one – two mm in diameter ) , translucent , entire edge , with a slightly raise elevation that can be either nonhemolytic , alpha - hemolytic , or beta - hemolytic when grow on blood agar ( figure two  one  .  one  three ) .
additionally , - pron - be facultative anaerobe that be catalase - negative .
figure two  one  .  one  three streptococcus pyogene form chain of cocci .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
the genus streptococcus include important pathogen that be categorize in serological lancefield group base on the distinguish characteristic of - pron - surface carbohydrate .
the most clinically important streptococcal specie in human be s . pyogene , also know as group a streptococcus ( gas ) .
s . pyogene produce a variety of extracellular enzyme , include streptolysin o and s , hyaluronidase , and streptokinase .
these enzyme can aid in transmission and contribute to the inflammatory response . [ six ] s . pyogene also produce a capsule and m protein , a streptococcal cell wall protein .
these virulence factor help the bacteria to avoid phagocytosis while provoke a substantial immune response that contribute to symptom associate with streptococcal infection .
s . pyogene cause a wide variety of disease not only in the skin , but in other organ system as well .
example of disease elsewhere in the body include pharyngitis and scarlet fever , which will be cover in later chapter .
six .
starr , c . r . and
engelberg north carolina “ role of hyaluronidase in subcutaneous spread and growth of group a streptococcus .
” infection and immunity two  zero  zero  six  (  seven   one )  four  zero – four  eight .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  one  two  eight  / iai .  seven  four  .  one  .  four  zero - four  eight  .  two  zero  zero  six .
nine  two  six chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five cellulitis , erysipelas , and erythema nosodum common streptococcal condition of the skin include cellulitis , erysipela , and erythema nodosum .
an infection that develop in the dermis or hypodermis can cause cellulitis , which present as a reddened area of the skin that be warm to the touch and painful .
the causative agent be often s . pyogene , which may breach the epidermis through a cut or abrasion , although cellulitis may also be cause by staphylococci .
s . pyogene can also cause erysipela , a condition that present as a large , intensely inflamed patch of skin involve the dermis ( often on the leg or face ) .
these infection can be suppurative , which result in a bullous form of erysipela .
streptococcal and other pathogen may also cause a condition call erythema nodosum , characterize by inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cell of the hypodermis .
- pron - sometimes result from a streptococcal infection , though other pathogen can also cause the condition .
- pron - be not suppurative , but lead to red nodule on the skin , most frequently on the shin ( figure two  one  .  one  four ) .
in general , streptococcal infection be best treat through identification of the specific pathogen follow by treatment base upon that particular pathogen 's susceptibility to different antibiotic .
many immunological test , include agglutination reaction and elisa , can be use to detect streptococci .
penicillin be commonly prescribe for treatment of cellulitis and erysipela because resistance be not widespread in streptococci at this time .
in most patient , erythema nodosum be self - limit and be not treat with antimicrobial drug .
recommend treatment may include nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drug ( nsaids ) , cool wet compress , elevation , and bed rest .
figure two  one  .  one  four s . pyogene can cause a variety of skin condition once - pron - breach the skin barrier through a cut or wound .
( a ) cellulitis present as a painful , red rash .
( b ) erysipelas present as a raise rash , usually with clear border .
( c ) erythema nodosum be characterize by red lump or nodule , typically on the low leg .
( credit a  modification of work by “ bassukas id , gaitanis g , zioga a , boboyianni c , stergiopoulou c  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by dean c , crow wt )
necrotizing fasciitis streptococcal infection that start in the skin can sometimes spread elsewhere , result in a rare but potentially life - threaten condition call necrotize fasciitis , sometimes refer to as flesh - eat bacterial syndrome .
s . pyogene be one of several specie that can cause this rare but potentially - fatal condition  other include klebsiella , clostridium , escherichia coli , s . aureus , and aeromonas hydrophila .
necrotize fasciitis occur when the fascia , a thin layer of connective tissue between the skin and muscle , become infect .
severe invasive necrotizing fasciitis due to streptococcus pyogene occur when virulence factor that be responsible for adhesion and invasion overcome host defense .
s . pyogene invasin allow bacterial cell to adhere to tissue and establish infection .
bacterial protease unique to s . pyogene aggressively infiltrate and destroy host tissue , inactivate complement , and prevent neutrophil migration to the site of infection .
the infection and result tissue death can spread very rapidly , as large area of skin become detached and die .
treatment generally require debridement ( surgical removal of dead or infected tissue ) or amputation of infect limb to stop the spread of the infection  surgical treatment be supplement with intravenous antibiotic and other therapy ( figure two  one  .  one  five ) .
necrotize fasciitis do not always originate from a skin infection  in some case there be no known portal of entry .
some study have suggest that experience a blunt force trauma can increase the risk of develop streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis . [ seven ] chapter two  one
 skin and eye infections nine  two  seven figure two  one  .  one  five ( a )
the left leg of this patient show the clinical feature of necrotize fasciitis .
( b )
the same patient 's leg be surgically debride to remove the infection .
( credit a , b  modification of work by piotr smuszkiewicz , iwona trojanowska , and hanna tomczak )

how do staphylococcal infection differ in general presentation from streptococcal infection ?
part two observe that sam 's wound be purulent , the doctor tell - pron - that - pron - probably have a bacterial infection .
- pron - take a sample from the lesion to send for laboratory analysis , but because - pron - be friday , - pron - do not expect to receive the result until the follow monday .
in the meantime , - pron - prescribe an over - the - counter topical antibiotic ointment .
- pron - tell sam to keep the wound clean and apply a new bandage with the ointment at least twice per day .

how would the lab technician determine if the infection be staphylococcal or streptococcal ?
suggest several specific method .

what test may the lab perform to determine the good course of antibiotic treatment ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
pseudomonas infections of the skin
another important skin pathogen be pseudomonas aeruginosa , a gram - negative , oxidase - positive , aerobic bacillus that be commonly find in water and soil as well as on human skin .
p . aeruginosa be a common cause of opportunistic infection of wound and burn .
- pron - can also cause hot tub rash , a condition characterize by folliculitis that frequently afflict user of pool and hot tub ( recall the clinical focus case in microbial biochemistry ) .
p . aeruginosa be also the cause of otitis externa ( swimmer 's ear ) , an infection of the ear canal that cause itching , redness , and discomfort , and can progress to fever , pain , and swell ( figure two  one  .  one  six ) .
clinical focus seven .
nuwayhid , z . b . , aronoff , d . m . , and mulla , z . d . .
" blunt trauma as a risk factor for group a streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis .
"
annals of epidemiology ( two  zero  zero  seven ) one  seven   eight  seven  eight – eight  eight  one .
nine  two  eight chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  one  .  one  six ( a ) hot tub folliculitis present as an itchy red rash .
- pron - be typically cause by p . aeruginosa , a bacterium that thrive in wet , warm environment such as hot tub .
( b ) otitis externa ( swimmer 's ear ) may also be cause by p . aeruginosa or other bacteria commonly find in water .
inflammation of the outer ear and ear canal can lead to painful swelling .
( credit b  modification of work by klaus d . peter )
wounds infect with p . aeruginosa have a distinctive odor resemble grape soda or fresh corn tortillas .
this odor be cause by the two  - aminoacetophenone that be use by p . aeruginosa in quorum sensing and contribute to - pron - pathogenicity .
wound infect with certain strain of p . aeruginosa also produce a blue - green pus due to the pigment pyocyanin and pyoverdin , which also contribute to - pron - virulence .
pyocyanin and pyoverdin be siderophore that help p . aeruginosa survive in low - iron environment by enhance iron uptake .
p . aeruginosa also produce several other virulence factor , include phospholipase c ( a hemolysin capable of break down red blood cell ) , exoenzyme s ( involve in adherence to epithelial cell ) , and exotoxin a ( capable of cause tissue necrosis ) .
other virulence factor include a slime that allow the bacterium to avoid be phagocytize , fimbriae for adherence , and protease that cause tissue damage .
p . aeruginosa can be detect through the use of cetrimide agar , which be selective for pseudomonas specie ( figure two  one  .  one  seven ) .
figure two  one  .  one  seven
( a ) these p . aeruginosa colony be grow on xylose lysine sodium deoxycholate ( xld ) agar .
( b ) pseudomonas spp .
can produce a variety of blue - green pigment .
( c ) pseudomonas spp . may produce fluorescein , which fluoresce green under ultraviolet light under the right condition .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
pseudomonas spp .
tend to be resistant to most antibiotic .
- pron - often produce β - lactamase , may have mutation affect porin ( small cell wall channel ) that affect antibiotic uptake , and may pump some antibiotic out of the cell , contribute to this resistance .
polymyxin b and gentamicin be effective , as be some fluoroquinolone .
otitis externa be typically treat with ear drop contain acetic acid , antibacterial , and / or steroid to reduce inflammation  ear drop may also include antifungal because fungi can sometimes cause or contribute to otitis externa .
wound infection cause by pseudomonas spp . may be treat with topical antibiofilm agent that disrupt the formation of chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  two  nine biofilm .

name at least two type of skin infection commonly cause by pseudomonas spp .
acne one of the most ubiquitous skin condition be acne .
acne afflict nearly eight  zero % of teenager and young adult , but - pron - can be find in individual of all age .
high incidence among adolescent be due to hormonal change that can result in overproduction of sebum .
acne occur when hair follicle become clog by shed skin cell and sebum , cause non - inflammatory lesion call comedo .
comedo ( singular " comedo " ) can take the form of whitehead and blackhead pimple .
whitehead be cover by skin , whereas blackhead pimple be not  the black color occur when lipid in the clog follicle become expose to the air and oxidize ( figure two  one  .  one  eight ) .
figure two  one  .  one  eight
( a )
acne be characterize by whitehead and blackhead comedo that result from clog hair follicle .
( b ) blackhead , visible as black spot on the skin , have a dark appearance due to the oxidation of lipid in sebum via exposure to the air .
( credit a  modification of work by bruce blaus )
often comedone lead to infection by propionibacterium acne , a gram - positive , non - spore - form , aerotolerant anaerobic bacillus find on skin that consume component of sebum .
p . acne secrete enzyme that damage the hair follicle , cause inflammatory lesion that may include papule , pustule , nodule , or pseudocyst , depend on - pron - size and severity .
treatment of acne depend on the severity of the case .
there be multiple way to grade acne severity , but three level be usually consider base on the number of comedo , the number of inflammatory lesion , and the type of lesion .
mild acne be treat with topical agent that may include salicylic acid ( which help to remove old skin cell ) or retinoid ( which have multiple mechanism , include the reduction of inflammation ) .
moderate acne may be treat with antibiotic ( erythromycin , clindamycin ) , acne cream ( e . g . , benzoyl peroxide ) , and hormone .
severe acne may require treatment use strong medication such as isotretinoin ( a retinoid that reduce oil buildup , among other effect , but that also have serious side effect such as photosensitivity ) .
other treatment , such as phototherapy and las therapy to kill bacteria and possibly reduce oil production , be also sometimes use .
nine  three  zero chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be the role of propionibacterium acne in cause acne ?
resolution sam use the topical antibiotic over the weekend to treat - pron - wound , but - pron - do not see any improvement .
on monday , the doctor call to inform - pron - that the result from - pron - laboratory test be in .
the test show evidence of both staphylococcus and streptococcus in - pron - wound .
the bacterial specie be confirm use several test .
a passive agglutination test confirm the presence of s . aureus .
in this type of test , latex bead with antibody cause agglutination when s . aureus be present .
streptococcus pyogene be confirm in the wound base on bacitracin ( zero  .  zero  four unit ) susceptibility as well as latex agglutination test specific for s . pyogene .
because many strain of s . aureus be resistant to antibiotic , the doctor have also request an antimicrobial susceptibility test ( ast ) at the same time the speciman be submit for identification .
the result of the ast indicate no drug resistance for the streptococcus spp .  the staphylococcus spp .
show resistance to several common antibiotic , but be susceptible to cefoxitin and oxacillin .
once sam begin to use these new antibiotic , the infection resolve within a week and the lesion heal .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
anthrax
the zoonotic disease anthrax be cause by bacillus anthracis , a gram - positive , endospore - form , facultative anaerobe .
anthrax mainly affect animal such as sheep , goat , cattle , and deer , but can be find in human as well .
sometimes call wool sorter 's disease , - pron - be often transmit to human through contact with infected animal or animal product , such as wool or hide .
however , exposure to b . anthracis can occur by other mean , as the endospore be widespread in soil and can survive for long period of time , sometimes for hundred of year .
the vast majority of anthrax case ( nine  five – nine  nine % ) occur when anthrax endospore enter the body through abrasion of the skin . [ eight ]
this form of the disease be call cutaneous anthrax .
- pron - be characterize by the formation of a nodule on the skin  the cell within the nodule die , form a black eschar , a mass of dead skin tissue ( figure two  one  .  one  nine ) .
the localized infection can eventually lead to bacteremia and septicemia .
if untreated , cutaneous anthrax can cause death in two  zero % of patients . [ nine ]
once in the skin tissue , b . anthracis endospore germinate and produce a capsule , which prevent the bacteria from be phagocytize , and two binary exotoxin that cause edema and tissue damage .
the first of the two exotoxin consist of a combination of protective antigen ( pa ) and an enzymatic lethal factor ( lf ) , form lethal toxin ( letx ) .
the second consist of protective antigen ( pa ) and an edema factor ( ef ) , form edema toxin ( edtx ) .
clinical focus eight .
shadomy , s . v . , traxler , r . m . , and marston , c . k . “ infectious diseases
related to travel 
anthrax ” two  zero  one  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
http / / wwwnc . cdc . gov / travel / yellowbook /  two  zero  one  six  / infectious - diseases - related - to - travel / anthrax .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
nine .
us fda .
“
anthrax .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . fda . gov / biologicsbloodvaccines / vaccines / ucm zero  six  one  seven  five  one  . htm .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
nine  three  one figure two  one  .  one  nine
( a ) cutaneous anthrax be an infection of the skin by b . anthracis , which produce tissue - damage exotoxin .
dead tissue accumulate in this nodule have produce a small black eschar .
( b ) colonies of b . anthracis grow on sheep 's blood agar .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
less commonly , anthrax infection can be initiate through other portal of entry such as the digestive tract ( gastrointestinal anthrax ) or respiratory tract ( pulmonary anthrax or inhalation anthrax ) .
typically , case of noncutaneous anthrax be more difficult to treat than the cutaneous form .
the mortality rate for gastrointestinal anthrax can be up to four  zero % , even with treatment .
inhalation anthrax , which occur when anthrax spore be inhale , initially cause influenza - like symptom , but mortality rate be approximately four  five % in treated individual and eight  five % in those not treat .
a relatively new form of the disease , injection anthrax , have be report in europe in intravenous drug user  - pron - occur when drug be contaminate with b . anthracis .
patient with injection anthrax show sign and symptom of severe soft tissue infection that differ clinically from cutaneous anthrax .
this often delay diagnosis and treatment , and lead to a high mortality rate . [ one  zero ] b . anthracis colony on blood agar have a rough texture and serrate edge that eventually form an undulating band ( figure two  one  .  one  nine ) .
broad spectrum antibiotic such as penicillin , erythromycin , and tetracycline be often effective treatment .
unfortunately , b . anthracis have be use as a biological weapon and remain on the united nations ' list of potential agent of bioterrorism . [ one  one ]
over a period of several month in two  zero  zero  one , a number of letter be mail to member of the news medium and the united states congress .
as a result , one  one individual develop cutaneous anthrax and another one  one developed inhalation anthrax .
those infect include recipient of the letter , postal worker , and two other individual .
five of those infect with pulmonary anthrax die .
the anthrax spore have be carefully prepared to aerosolize , show that the perpetrator have a high level of expertise in microbiology . [ one  two ]
a vaccine be available to protect individual from anthrax .
however , unlike most routine vaccine , the current anthrax vaccine be unique in both - pron - formulation and the protocol
dictate who receive it . [ one  three ]
the vaccine be administer through five intramuscular injection over a period of one  eight month , follow by annual booster .
the us food and drug administration ( fda ) have only approve administration of the vaccine prior to exposure for at - risk adult , such as individual who work with anthrax in a laboratory , some individual who handle animal or animal product ( e . g . , some veterinarian ) , and some member of the united states military .
the vaccine protect against cutaneous and one  zero .
berger , t . , kassirer , m . , and aran , a . a . .
“
injectional anthrax - new presentation of an old disease .
"
euro surveillance one  nine ( two  zero  one  four ) three  two .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed /  two  five  one  three  nine  zero  seven  three .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
one  one .
united nations office at geneva .
“
what be biological and toxin weapons ?
"
http / / www . unog . ch / eight  zero  two  five  six ee six  zero  zero  five  eight  five  nine  four  three  / % two  eight httppages% two  nine  /  two  nine b seven  two  seven  five  three  two fecbe nine  six c one  two  five  seven  one  eight  six  zero  zero  three  five a six db ?
.
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
one  two .
federal bureau of investigation .
“
famous cases and criminals  amerithrax or anthrax investigation .
”
https / / www . fbi . gov / history / famous - case / amerithrax - or - anthrax - investigation .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
one  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
anthrax 
medical care  prevention  antibiotics .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / anthrax / medicalcare / prevention . html .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
nine  three  two chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five inhalation anthrax use cell - free filtrate of microaerophilic culture of an avirulent , nonencapsulated strain of b . anthracis . [ one  four ]
the fda have not approve the vaccine for routine use after exposure to anthrax , but if there be ever an anthrax emergency in the united states , patient could be give anthrax vaccine after exposure to help prevent disease .

what be the characteristic feature of a cutaneous anthrax infection ?
bacterial infections of the skin bacterial infection of the skin can cause a wide range of symptom and syndrome , range from the superficial and relatively harmless to the severe and even fatal .
most bacterial skin infection can be diagnose by culture the bacteria and treat with antibiotic .
antimicrobial susceptibility testing be also often necessary because many strain of bacteria have develop antibiotic resistance .
figure two  one  .  two  zero summarize the characteristic of some common bacterial skin infection .
disease profile one  four .
emergent biosolutions .
ava ( biothrax ) vaccine package insert ( draft ) .
nov two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . fda . gov / downloads / biologicsbloodvaccine / bloodbloodproduct / approvedproduct / licensedproductsblas / ucm zero  seven  four  nine  two  three  . pdf .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  three  three figure two  one  .  two  zero bacterial conjunctivitis
like the skin , the surface of the eye come in contact with the outside world and be somewhat prone to infection by bacteria in the environment .
bacterial conjunctivitis ( pinkeye ) be a condition characterize by inflammation of the conjunctiva , often accompany by a discharge of sticky fluid ( describe as acute purulent conjunctivitis )
( figure two  one  .  two  one ) .
conjunctivitis can affect one eye or both , and - pron - usually do not affect vision permanently .
bacterial conjunctivitis be most commonly cause by haemophilus influenzae , but can also be cause by other specie such as moraxella catarrhalis , s . pneumoniae , and s . aureus .
the causative agent may be identify use bacterial culture , gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile test of the isolate pathogen .
bacterial conjunctivitis be very contagious , be transmit via secretion from infect individual , but - pron - be also self - limit .
nine  three  four chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five bacterial conjunctivitis usually resolve in a few day , but topical antibiotic be sometimes prescribe .
because this condition be so contagious , medical attention be recommend whenever - pron - be suspect .
individual who use contact lense should discontinue - pron - use when conjunctivitis be suspect .
certain symptom , such as blurred vision , eye pain , and light sensitivity , can be associate with serious condition and require medical attention .
figure two  one  .  two  one acute , purulent , bacterial conjunctivitis cause swell and redness in the conjunctiva , the membrane line the white of the eye and the inner eyelid .
- pron - be often accompany by a yellow , green , or white discharge , which can dry and become encrusted on the eyelash .
( credit 
“ tanalai” / wikimedia commons )
neonatal conjunctivitis newborns whose mother have certain sexually transmit infection be at risk of contract ophthalmia neonatorum or inclusion conjunctivitis , which be two form of neonatal conjunctivitis contract through exposure to pathogen during passage through the birth canal .
gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum be cause by neisseria gonorrhoeae , the bacterium that cause the std gonorrhea ( figure two  one  .  two  two ) .
inclusion ( chlamydial ) conjunctivitis be cause by chlamydia trachomatis , the anaerobic , obligate , intracellular parasite that cause the std chlamydia .
to prevent gonoccocal ophthalmia neonatorum , silver nitrate ointment be once routinely apply to all infant ' eye shortly after birth  however , - pron - be now more common to apply antibacterial cream or drop , such as erythromycin .
most hospital be require by law to provide this preventative treatment to all infant , because conjunctivitis cause by n . gonorrhoeae , c . trachomatis , or other bacteria acquire during a vaginal delivery can have serious complication .
if untreated , the infection can spread to the cornea , result in ulceration or perforation that can cause vision loss or even permanent blindness .
as such , neonatal conjunctivitis be treat aggressively with oral or intravenous antibiotic to stop the spread of the infection .
causative agent of inclusion conjunctivitis may be identify use bacterial culture , gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile test .
figure two  one  .  two  two
a newborn suffering from gonoccocal opthalmia neonatorum .
leave untreated , purulent discharge can scar the cornea , cause loss of vision or permanent blindness .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )

compare and contrast bacterial conjunctivitis with neonatal conjunctivitis .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  three  five trachoma trachoma , or granular conjunctivitis , be a common cause of preventable blindness that be rare in the united states but widespread in develop country , especially in africa and asia .
the condition be cause by the same specie that cause neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis in infant , chlamydia trachomatis .
c . trachomatis can be transmit easily through fomite such as contaminate towel , bed linen , and clothing and also by direct contact with infected individual .
c . trachomatis can also be spread by fly that transfer infect mucous contain c . trachomatis from one human to another .
infection by c . trachomatis cause chronic conjunctivitis , which lead to the formation of necrotic follicle and scar in the upper eyelid .
the scar turn the eyelash inward ( a condition know as trichiasis ) and mechanical abrasion of the cornea lead to blindness ( figure two  one  .  two  three ) .
antibiotic such as azithromycin be effective in treat trachoma , and outcome be good when the disease be treat promptly .
in area where this disease be common , large public health effort be focus on reduce transmission by teach people how to avoid the risk of the infection .
figure two  one  .  two  three ( a )
if trachoma be not treat early with antibiotic , scar on the eyelid can lead to trichiasis , a condition in which the eyelash turn inward .
( b )
trichiasis lead to blindness if not correct by surgery , as show here .
( credit b  modification of work by otis historical archives national museum of health and medicine )

why be trachoma rare in the united states ?
safe eradication of trachoma
though uncommon in the united states and other develop nation , trachoma be the lead cause of preventable blindness worldwide , with more than four million people at immediate risk of blindness from trichiasis .
the vast majority of those affect by trachoma live in africa and the middle east in isolate rural or desert community with limited access to clean water and sanitation .
these condition provide an environment micro connections nine  three  six chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five conducive to the growth and spread of chlamydia trachomatis , the bacterium that cause trachoma , via wastewater and eye - seek fly .
in response to this crisis , recent year have see major public health effort aim at treat and prevent trachoma .
the alliance for global elimination of trachoma by two  zero  two  zero ( get two  zero  two  zero ) , coordinate by the world health organization ( who ) , promote an initiative dub “ safe , " which stand for “ surgery , antibiotics , facial cleanliness , and environmental improvement .
"
the carter center , a charitable , nongovernment organization lead by former us president jimmy carter , have partner with the who to promote the safe initiative in six of the most critically impact nation in africa .
through - pron - trachoma control program , the carter center train and equip local surgeon to correct trichiasis and distribute antibiotic to treat trachoma .
the program also promote well personal hygiene through health education and improve sanitation by fund the construction of household latrine .
this reduce the prevalence of open sewage , which provide breeding ground for the fly that spread trachoma .
bacterial keratitis keratitis can have many cause , but bacterial keratitis be most frequently cause by staphylococcus epidermidis and / or pseudomonas aeruginosa .
contact lens user be particularly at risk for such an infection because s . epidermidis and p . aeruginosa both adhere well to the surface of the lense .
risk of infection can be greatly reduce by proper care of contact lense and avoid wear lense overnight .
because the infection can quickly lead to blindness , prompt and aggressive treatment with antibiotic be important .
the causative agent may be identify use bacterial culture , gram stain , and diagnostic biochemical , antigenic , or nucleic acid profile test of the isolated pathogen .
 why be contact lens wearer at great risk for develop keratitis ?
biofilms and infections of the skin and eye
when treat bacterial infection of the skin and eye , - pron - be important to consider that few such infection can be attribute to a single pathogen .
while biofilm may develop in other part of the body , - pron - be especially relevant to skin infection ( such as those cause by s . aureus or p . aeruginosa ) because of - pron - prevalence in chronic skin wound .
biofilm develop when bacteria ( and sometimes fungi ) attach to a surface and produce extracellular polymeric substance ( eps ) in which cell of multiple organism may be embed .
when a biofilm develop on a wound , - pron - may interfere with the natural healing process as well as diagnosis and treatment .
because biofilm vary in composition and be difficult to replicate in the lab , - pron - be still not thoroughly understand .
the extracellular matrix of a biofilm consist of polymer such as polysaccharide , extracellular dna , protein , and lipid , but the exact makeup varie .
the organism live within the extracellular matrix may include familiar pathogen as well as other bacteria that do not grow well in culture ( such as numerous obligate anaerobe ) .
this present challenge when culture sample from infection that involve a biofilm .
because only some specie grow in vitro , the culture may contain only a subset of the bacterial specie involve in the infection .
biofilm confer many advantage to the resident bacteria .
for example , biofilm can facilitate attachment to surface on or in the host organism ( such as wound ) , inhibit phagocytosis , prevent the invasion of neutrophil , and sequester host antibody .
additionally , biofilm can provide a level of antibiotic resistance not find in the isolated cell and colony that be typical of laboratory culture .
the extracellular matrix provide a physical barrier to antibiotic , shield the target cell from exposure .
moreover , cell within a biofilm may differentiate to create subpopulation of dormant cell call persister cell .
nutrient limitation deep within a biofilm add another level of resistance , as stress response can slow metabolism and increase drug resistance .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  three  seven bacterial infections of the eyes
a number of bacteria be able to cause infection when introduce to the mucosa of the eye .
in general , bacterial eye infection can lead to inflammation , irritation , and discharge , but - pron - vary in severity .
some be typically short - lived , and other can become chronic and lead to permanent eye damage .
prevention require limit exposure to contagious pathogen .
when infection do occur , prompt treatment with antibiotic can often limit or prevent permanent damage .
figure two  one  .  two  four summarize the characteristic of some common bacterial infection of the eye .
figure two  one  .  two  four two  one  .  three viral infections of the skin and eyes learning objectives
 identify the most common virus associate with infection of the skin and eye  compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease affect the skin and eye until recently , - pron - be think that the normal microbiota of the body consist primarily of bacteria and some fungi .
however , in addition to bacteria , the skin be colonize by virus , and recent study suggest that papillomaviridae , polyomaviridae and circoviridae also contribute to the normal skin microbiota .
however , some virus associate with skin be pathogenic , and these virus can cause disease with a wide variety of presentation .
numerous type of viral infection cause rash or lesion on the skin  however , in many case these skin condition result from infection that originate in other body system .
in this chapter , - pron - will limit the discussion to viral skin disease profile nine  three  eight chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five infection that use the skin as a portal of entry .
later chapter will discuss viral infection such as chickenpox , measle , and rubella - disease that cause skin rash but invade the body through portal of entry other than the skin .
papillomas papillomas ( wart ) be the expression of common skin infection by human papillomavirus ( hpv ) and be transmit by direct contact .
there be many type of hpv , and - pron - lead to a variety of different presentation , such as common wart , plantar wart , flat wart , and filiform wart .
hpv can also cause sexually - transmit genital wart , which will be discuss in urogenital system infections .
vaccination be available for some strain of hpv .
common wart tend to develop on finger , the back of hand , and around nail in area with broken skin .
in contrast , plantar wart ( also call foot wart ) develop on the sole of the foot and can grow inward , cause pain and pressure during walk .
flat wart can develop anywhere on the body , be often numerous , and be relatively smooth and small compare with other wart type .
filiform wart be long , threadlike wart that grow quickly .
in some case , the immune system may be strong enough to prevent wart from form or to eradicate establish wart .
however , treatment of establish wart be typically require .
there be many available treatment for wart , and - pron - effectiveness vary .
common wart can be freeze off with liquid nitrogen .
topical application of salicylic acid may also be effective .
other option be electrosurgery ( burning ) , curettage ( cutting ) , excision , paint with cantharidin ( which cause the wart to die so - pron - can more easily be remove ) , laser treatment , treatment with bleomycin , chemical peel , and immunotherapy ( figure two  one  .  two  five ) .
figure two  one  .  two  five
wart can vary in shape and in location .
( a ) multiple plantar wart have grow on this toe .
( b )
a filiform wart have grow on this eyelid .
oral herpes
another common skin virus be herpe simplex virus ( hsv ) .
hsv have historically be divide into two type , hsv -  one and hsv -  two .
hsv -  one be typically transmit by direct oral contact between individual , and be usually associate with oral herpe .
hsv -  two be usually transmit sexually and be typically associate with genital herpe .
however , both hsv -  one and hsv -  two be capable of infect any mucous membrane , and the incidence of genital hsv -  one and oral hsv -  two infection have be increase in recent year .
in this chapter , - pron - will limit - pron - discussion to infection cause by hsv -  one  hsv -  two and genital herpe will be discuss in urogenital system infections .
infection by hsv -  one commonly manifest as cold sore or fever blister , usually on or around the lip ( figure two  one  .  two  six ) .
hsv -  one be highly contagious , with some study suggest that up to six  five % of the us population be infect  however , many infect individual be asymptomatic . [ one  five ]
moreover , the virus can be latent for long period , reside one  five .
wald , a . , and corey , l . “ persistence in the population  epidemiology , transmission .
"
in  a . arvin , g . campadelli - fiume , e . mocarski chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  three  nine in the trigeminal nerve ganglia between recur bout of symptom .
recurrence can be trigger by stress or environmental condition ( systemic or affect the skin ) .
when lesion be present , - pron - may blister , break open , and crust .
the virus can be spread through direct contact , even when a patient be asymptomatic .
while the lip , mouth , and face be the most common site for hsv -  one infection , lesion can spread to other area of the body .
wrestler and other athlete involve in contact sport may develop lesion on the neck , shoulder , and trunk .
this condition be often call herpe gladiatorum .
herpe lesion that develop on the finger be often call herpetic whitlow .
hsv -  one infection be commonly diagnose from - pron - appearance , although laboratory testing can confirm the diagnosis .
there be no cure , but antiviral medication such as acyclovir , penciclovir , famciclovir , and valacyclovir be use to reduce symptom and risk of transmission .
topical medication , such as cream with n - docosanol and penciclovir , can also be use to reduce symptom such as itching , burning , and tingle .
figure two  one  .  two  six
this cold sore be cause by hsv -  one .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )

what be the most common site for the appearance of herpetic lesion ?
roseola and fifth disease
the viral disease roseola and fifth disease be somewhat similar in term of - pron - presentation , but - pron - be cause by different virus .
roseola , sometimes call roseola infantum or exanthem subitum ( " sudden rash " ) , be a mild viral infection usually cause by human herpesvirus -  six ( hhv -  six ) and occasionally by hhv -  seven .
- pron - be spread via direct contact with the saliva or respiratory secretion of an infected individual , often through droplet aerosol .
roseola be very common in child , with symptom include a runny nose , a sore throat , and a cough , along with ( or follow by ) a high fever ( three  nine  .  four ºc ) .
about three to five day after the fever subside , a rash may begin to appear on the chest and abdomen .
the rash , which do not cause discomfort , initially form characteristic macule that be flat or papule that be firm and slightly raise  some macule or papule may be surround by a white ring .
the rash may eventually spread to the neck and arm , and sometimes continue to spread to the face and leg .
the diagnosis be generally make base upon observation of the symptom .
however , - pron - be possible to perform serological test to confirm the diagnosis .
while treatment may be recommend to control the fever , the disease usually resolve without treatment within a week after the fever develop .
for individual at particular risk , such as those who be immunocompromise , the antiviral medication ganciclovir may be use .
fifth disease ( also know as erythema infectiosum ) be another common , highly contagious illness that cause a distinct rash that be critical to diagnosis .
fifth disease be cause by parvovirus b one  nine , and be transmit by contact et al .
human herpesviruses 
biology , therapy , and immunoprophylaxis .
cambridge 
cambridge university press , two  zero  zero  seven .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / book / nbk four  seven  four  four  seven  / . accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
nine  four  zero chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five with respiratory secretion from an infected individual .
infection be more common in child than adult .
while approximately two  zero % of individual will be asymptomatic during infection , [ one  six ] other will exhibit cold - like symptom ( headache , fever , and upset stomach ) during the early stage when the illness be most infectious .
several day later , a distinct red facial rash appear , often call “ slap cheek " rash ( figure two  one  .  two  seven ) .
within a few day , a second rash may appear on the arm , leg , chest , back , or buttock .
the rash may come and go for several week , but usually disappear within seven to twenty - one day , gradually become lacy in appearance as - pron - recede .
in child , the disease usually resolve on - pron - own without medical treatment beyond symptom relief as need .
adult may experience different and possibly more serious symptom .
many adult with fifth disease do not develop any rash , but may experience joint pain and swelling that last several week or month .
immunocompromise individual can develop severe anemia and may need blood transfusion or immune globulin injection .
while the rash be the most important component of diagnosis ( especially in child ) , the symptom of fifth disease be not always consistent .
serological testing can be conduct for confirmation .
figure two  one  .  two  seven ( a )
roseola , a mild viral infection common in young child , generally begin with symptom similar to a cold , follow by a pink , patchy rash that start on the trunk and spread outward .
( b ) fifth disease exhibit similar symptom in child , except for the distinctive “ slap cheek
" rash that originate on the face .

identify at least one similarity and one difference between roseola and fifth disease .
viral conjunctivitis
like bacterial conjunctivitis viral infection of the eye can cause inflammation of the conjunctiva and discharge from the eye .
however , viral conjunctivitis tend to produce a discharge that be more watery than the thick discharge associate with bacterial conjunctivitis .
the infection be contagious and can easily spread from one eye to the other or to other individual through contact with eye discharge .
viral conjunctivitis be commonly associate with cold cause by adenovirus  however , other virus can also cause one  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
fifth disease .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / parvovirusb one  nine  / fifth - disease . html .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  four  one conjunctivitis .
if the causative agent be uncertain , eye discharge can be test to aid in diagnosis .
antibiotic treatment of viral conjunctivitis be ineffective , and symptom usually resolve without treatment within a week or two .
herpes keratitis herpes infection cause by hsv -  one can sometimes spread to the eye from other area of the body , which may result in keratoconjunctivitis .
this condition , generally call herpe keratitis or herpetic keratitis , affect the conjunctiva and cornea , cause irritation , excess tear , and sensitivity to light .
deep lesion in the cornea may eventually form , lead to blindness .
because keratitis can have numerous cause , laboratory testing be necessary to confirm the diagnosis when hsv -  one be suspect  once confirm , antiviral medication may be prescribe .
viral infections of the skin and eye
a number of virus can cause infection via direct contact with skin and eye , cause sign and symptom range from rash and lesion to wart and conjunctivitis .
all of these viral disease be contagious , and while some be more common in child ( fifth disease and roseola ) , other be prevalent in people of all age ( oral herpe , viral conjunctivitis , papillomas ) .
in general , the good mean of prevention be avoid contact with infected individual .
treatment may require antiviral medication  however , several of these condition be mild and typically resolve without treatment .
figure two  one  .  two  eight summarize the characteristic of some common viral infection of the skin and eye .
disease profile nine  four  two chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  one  .  two  eight two  one  .  four mycose of the skin learning objectives
 identify the most common fungal pathogen associate with cutaneous and subcutaneous mycose  compare the major characteristic of specific fungal disease affect the skin many fungal infection of the skin involve fungus that be find in the normal skin microbiota .
some of these fungi can cause infection when - pron - gain entry through a wound  other mainly cause opportunistic infection in immunocompromised patient .
other fungal pathogen primarily cause infection in unusually moist environment that promote fungal growth  for example , sweaty shoe , communal shower , and locker room provide excellent breeding ground that promote the growth and transmission of fungal pathogen .
fungal infection , also call mycose , can be divide into class base on - pron - invasiveness .
mycose that cause superficial infection of the epidermis , hair , and nail , be call cutaneous mycose .
mycose that penetrate the epidermis and the dermis to infect deep tissue be call subcutaneous mycose .
mycose that spread throughout the body be call systemic mycose .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
nine  four  three
tineas a group of cutaneous mycose call tinea be cause by dermatophyte , fungal mold that require keratin , a protein find in skin , hair , and nail , for growth .
there be three genera of dermatophyte , all of which can cause cutaneous mycose  trichophyton , epidermophyton , and microsporum .
tinea on most area of the body be generally call ringworm , but tinea in specific location may have distinctive name and symptom ( see table two  one  .  three and figure two  one  .  two  nine ) .
keep in mind that these name - even though - pron - be latinize - refer to location on the body , not causative organism .
tinea can be cause by different dermatophyte in most area of the body .
some common tineas and location on the body tinea corporis ( ringworm )
body tinea capitis ( ringworm )
scalp
tinea pedis ( athlete 's foot )
feet tinea barbae ( barber 's itch )
beard tinea cruris ( jock itch )
groin tinea unguium ( onychomycosis )
toenails , fingernail table two  one  .  three
figure two  one  .  two  nine tineas be superficial cutaneous mycose and be common .
( a ) tinea barbae ( barber 's itch ) occur on the low face .
( b )
tinea pedis ( athlete 's foot ) occur on the foot , cause itch , burning , and dry , cracked skin between the toe .
( c )
a close - up view of tinea corporis ( ringworm ) cause by trichophyton mentagrophyte .
( credit a , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by al hasan m , fitzgerald sm , saoudian m , krishnaswamy g )
dermatophyte be commonly find in the environment and in soil and be frequently transfer to the skin via contact with other human and animal .
fungal spore can also spread on hair .
many dermatophyte grow well in moist , dark environment .
for example , tinea pedis ( athlete 's foot ) commonly spread in public shower , and the causative fungi grow well in the dark , moist confine of sweaty shoe and sock .
likewise , tinea cruris ( jock itch ) often spread in communal living environment and thrive in warm , moist undergarment .
tinea on the body ( tinea corporis ) often produce lesion that grow radially and heal towards the center .
this cause the formation of a red ring , lead to the misleading name of ringworm recall the clinical focus case in the eukaryotes of microbiology .
several approach may be use to diagnose tinea .
a wood 's lamp ( also call a black lamp ) with a wavelength of three  six  five nm be often use .
when direct on a tinea , the ultraviolet light emit from the wood 's lamp cause the fungal element ( spore and hypha ) to fluoresce .
direct microscopic evaluation of specimen from skin scraping , hair , or nail can also be use to detect fungi .
generally , these specimen be prepare in a wet mount use a potassium hydroxide solution ( one  zero %– two  zero % aqueous koh ) , which dissolve the keratin in hair , nail , and skin cell to nine  four  four chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five allow for visualization of the hypha and fungal spore .
the specimen may be grow on sabouraud dextrose cc ( chloramphenicol / cyclohexamide ) , a selective agar that support dermatophyte growth while inhibit the growth of bacteria and saprophytic fungi ( figure two  one  .  three  zero ) .
macroscopic colony morphology be often use to initially identify the genus of the dermatophyte  identification can be further confirm by visualize the microscopic morphology use either a slide culture or a sticky tape prep stain with lactophenol cotton blue .
various antifungal treatment can be effective against tineas .
allylamine ointment that include terbinafine be commonly use  miconazole and clotrimazole be also available for topical treatment , and griseofulvin be use orally .
figure two  one  .  three  zero
to diagnose tinea , the dermatophyte may be grow on a sabouraud dextrose cc agar plate .
this culture contain a strain of trichophyton rubrum , one of the most common cause of tinea on various part of the body .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )

why be tineas , cause by fungal mold , often call ringworm ?
cutaneous aspergillosis
another cause of cutaneous mycose be aspergillus , a genus consisting of mold of many different specie , some of which cause a condition call aspergillosis .
primary cutaneous aspergillosis , in which the infection begin in the skin , be rare but do occur .
more common be secondary cutaneous aspergillosis , in which the infection begin in the respiratory system and disseminate systemically .
both primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis result in distinctive eschar that form at the site or site of infection ( figure two  one  .  three  one ) .
pulmonary aspergillosis will be discuss more thoroughly in respiratory mycoses ) .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
nine  four  five figure two  one  .  three  one ( a )
eschar on a patient with secondary cutaneous aspergillosis .
( b )
micrograph show a conidiophore of aspergillus .
( credit a  modification of work by santiago m , martinez jh , palermo c , figueroa c , torres o , trinidad r , gonzalez e , miranda mde l , garcia m , villamarzo g  credit b  modification of work by u . s . department of health and human services )
primary cutaneous aspergillosis usually occur at the site of an injury and be most often cause by aspergillus fumigatus or aspergillus flavus .
- pron - be usually report in patient who have have an injury while work in an agricultural or outdoor environment .
however , opportunistic infection can also occur in health - care setting , often at the site of intravenous catheter , venipuncture wound , or in association with burn , surgical wound , or occlusive dressing .
after candidiasis , aspergillosis be the second most common hospital - acquire fungal infection and often occur in immunocompromised patient , who be more vulnerable to opportunistic infection .
cutaneous aspergillosis be diagnose use patient history , culturing , histopathology use a skin biopsy .
treatment involve the use of antifungal medication such as voriconazole ( prefer for invasive aspergillosis ) , itraconazole , and amphotericin b if itraconazole be not effective .
for immunosuppressed individual or burn patient , medication may be use and surgical or immunotherapy treatment may be need .

identify the source of infection for primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis .
candidiasis of the skin and nails candida albican and other yeast in the genus candida can cause skin infection refer to as cutaneous candidiasis .
candida spp . be sometimes responsible for intertrigo , a general term for a rash that occur in a skin fold , or other localized rash on the skin .
candida can also infect the nail , cause - pron - to become yellow and harden ( figure two  one  .  three  two ) .
nine  four  six chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  one  .  three  two ( a )
this red , itchy rash be the result of cutaneous candidiasis , an opportunistic infection of the skin cause by the yeast candida albican .
( b ) fungal infection of the nail ( tinea unguium ) can be cause by dermatophyte or candida spp .
the nail become yellow , brittle , and prone to break .
this condition be relatively common among adult .
( c ) c . albican grow on sabouraud dextrose agar .
( credit a  modification of work by u . s . department of veterans affairs  credit c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) candidiasis of the skin and nail be diagnose through clinical observation and through culture , gram stain , and koh wet mount .
susceptibility testing for anti - fungal agent can also be do .
cutaneous candidiasis can be treat with topical or systemic azole antifungal medication .
because candidiasis can become invasive , patient suffer from hiv / aids , cancer , or other condition that compromise the immune system may benefit from preventive treatment .
azole , such as clotrimazole , econazole , fluconazole , ketoconazole , and miconazole  nystatin  terbinafine  and naftifine may be use for treatment .
long - term treatment with medication such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may be use for chronic infection .
repeat infection often occur , but this risk can be reduce by carefully follow treatment recommendation , avoid excessive moisture , maintain good health , practice good hygiene , and have appropriate clothing ( include footwear ) .
candida also cause infection in other part of the body besides the skin .
these include vaginal yeast infection ( see fungal infections of the reproductive system ) and oral thrush ( see microbial diseases of the mouth and oral cavity ) .

what be the sign and symptom of candidiasis of the skin and nail ?
sporotrichosis
whereas cutaneous mycose be superficial , subcutaneous mycose can spread from the skin to deep tissue .
in temperate region , the most common subcutaneous mycosis be a condition call sporotrichosis , cause by the fungus sporothrix schenkii and commonly know as rise gardener 's disease or rise thorn disease ( recall case in point 
every rose have - pron - thorn ) .
sporotrichosis be often contract after work with soil , plant , or timber , as the fungus can gain entry through a small wound such as a thorn - prick or splinter .
sporotrichosis can generally be avoid by wear glove and protective clothing while garden and promptly clean and disinfect any wound sustain during outdoor activity .
sporothrix infection initially present as small ulcer in the skin , but the fungus can spread to the lymphatic system and sometimes beyond .
when the infection spread , nodule appear , become necrotic , and may ulcerate .
as more lymph node become affect , abscess and ulceration may develop over a large area ( often on one arm or hand ) .
in severe case , the infection may spread more widely throughout the body , although this be relatively uncommon .
sporothrix infection can be diagnose base upon histologic examination of the affected tissue .
- pron - macroscopic chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  four  seven morphology can be observe by culture the mold on potato dextrose agar , and - pron - microscopic morphology can be observe by stain a slide culture with lactophenol cotton blue .
treatment with itraconazole be generally recommend .

describe the progression of a sporothrix schenkii infection .
mycose of the skin cutaneous mycose be typically opportunistic , only able to cause infection when the skin barrier be breach through a wound .
tinea be the exception , as the dermatophyte responsible for tinea be able to grow on skin , hair , and nail , especially in moist condition .
most mycose of the skin can be avoid through good hygiene and proper wound care .
treatment require antifungal medication .
figure two  one  .  three  three summarize the characteristic of some common fungal infection of the skin .
figure two  one  .  three  three
two  one  .  five protozoan and helminthic infections of the skin and disease profile nine  four  eight chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five eye learning objectives
 identify two parasite that commonly cause infection of the skin and eye 
identify the major characteristic of specific parasitic disease affect the skin and eye many parasitic protozoan and helminth use the skin or eye as a portal of entry .
some may physically burrow into the skin or the mucosa of the eye  other breach the skin barrier by mean of an insect bite .
still other take advantage of a wound to bypass the skin barrier and enter the body , much like other opportunistic pathogen .
although many parasite enter the body through the skin , in this chapter - pron - will limit - pron - discussion to those for which the skin or eye be the primary site of infection .
parasite that enter through the skin but travel to a different site of infection will be cover in other chapter .
in addition , - pron - will limit - pron - discussion to microscopic parasitic infection of the skin and eye .
macroscopic parasite such as lice , scabie , mite , and tick be beyond the scope of this text .
acanthamoeba infections acanthamoeba be a genus of free - live protozoan amoebae that be common in soil and unchlorinated body of fresh water .
( this be one reason why some swimming pool be treat with chlorine . )
the genus contain a few parasitic specie , some of which can cause infection of the eye , skin , and nervous system .
such infection can sometimes travel and affect other body system .
skin infection may manifest as abscess , ulcer , and nodule .
when acanthamoebae infect the eye , cause inflammation of the cornea , the condition be call acanthamoeba keratitis .
figure two  one  .  three  four illustrate the acanthamoeba life cycle and various mode of infection .
while acanthamoeba keratitis be initially mild , - pron - can lead to severe corneal damage , vision impairment , or even blindness if leave untreated .
similar to eye infection involve p . aeruginosa , acanthamoeba pose a much great risk to wearer of contact lense because the amoeba can thrive in the space between contact lense and the cornea .
prevention through proper contact lens care be important .
lense should always be properly disinfect prior to use , and should never be wear while swim or use a hot tub .
acanthamoeba can also enter the body through other pathway , include skin wound and the respiratory tract .
- pron - usually do not cause disease except in immunocompromised individual  however , in rare case , the infection can spread to the nervous system , result in a usually fatal condition call granulomatous amoebic encephalitis ( gae ) ( see fungal and parasitic diseases of the nervous system ) .
disseminate infection , lesion , and acanthamoeba keratitis can be diagnose by observe symptom and examine patient sample under the microscope to view the parasite .
skin biopsy may be use .
acanthamoeba keratitis be difficult to treat , and prompt treatment be necessary to prevent the condition from progress .
the condition generally require three to four week of intensive treatment to resolve .
common treatment include topical antiseptic ( e . g . , polyhexamethylene biguanide , chlorhexidine , or both ) , sometimes with painkiller or corticosteroid ( although the latter be controversial because - pron - suppress the immune system , which can worsen the infection ) .
azole be sometimes prescribe as well .
advanced case of keratitis may require a corneal transplant to prevent blindness .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections nine  four  nine figure
two  one  .  three  four acanthamoeba spp . be waterborne parasite very common in unchlorinate aqueous environment .
as show in this life cycle , acanthamoeba cyst and trophozoite be both capable of enter the body through various route , cause infection of the eye , skin , and central nervous system .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
figure two  one  .  three  five
( a ) an acanthamoeba cyst .
( b )
an acanthamoeba trophozoite ( c ) the eye of a patient with acanthamoeba keratitis .
the fluorescent color , which be due to sodium fluorescein application , highlight significant damage to the cornea and vascularization of the surround conjunctiva .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b , c  modification of work by jacob lorenzo - morales , naveed a kahn and julia walochnik )

how be acanthamoeba infection acquire ?
nine  five  zero chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five loiasis
the helminth loa loa , also know as the african eye worm , be a nematode that can cause loiasis , a disease endemic to west and central africa
( figure two  one  .  three  six ) .
the disease do not occur outside that region except when carry by traveler .
there be evidence that individual genetic difference affect susceptibility to develop loiasis after infection by the loa loa worm .
even in area in which loa loa worm be common , the disease be generally find in less than three  zero % of the population . [ one  seven ]
- pron - have be suggest that traveler who spend time in the region may be somewhat more susceptible to develop symptom than the native population , and the presentation of infection may differ . [ one  eight ]
the parasite be spread by deerflie ( genus chrysops ) , which can ingest the larvae from an infect human via a blood meal ( figure two  one  .  three  six ) .
when the deerfly bite other human , - pron - deposit the larvae into - pron - bloodstream .
after about five month in the human body , some larvae develop into adult worm , which can grow to several centimeter in length and live for year in the subcutaneous tissue of the host .
the name “ eye worm " allude to the visible migration of worm across the conjunctiva of the eye .
adult worm live in the subcutaneous tissue and can travel at about one cm per hour .
- pron - can often be observe when migrate through the eye , and sometimes under the skin  in fact , this be generally how the disease be diagnose .
- pron - be also possible to test for antibody , but the presence of antibody do not necessarily indicate a current infection  - pron - only mean that the individual be expose at some time .
some patient be asymptomatic , but in other the migrate worm can cause fever and area of allergic inflammation know as calabar swelling .
worm migrate through the conjunctiva can cause temporary eye pain and itching , but generally there be no lasting damage to the eye .
some patient experience a range of other symptom , such as widespread itching , hive , and joint and muscle pain .
worm can be surgically remove from the eye or the skin , but this treatment only relieve discomfort  - pron - do not cure the infection , which involve many worm .
the preferred treatment be diethylcarbamazine , but this medication produce severe side effect in some individual , such as brain inflammation and possible death in patient with heavy infection .
albendazole be also sometimes use if diethylcarbamazine be not appropriate or not successful .
if leave untreated for many year , loiasis can damage the kidney , heart , and lung , though these symptom be rare .
one  seven .
garcia , a . . et al .
“ genetic epidemiology of host predisposition microfilaraemia in human loiasis .
" tropical medicine and international health four ( one  nine  nine  nine )
eight   five  six  five – seven  four .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed /  one  zero  four  nine  nine  zero  eight  zero .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
one  eight .
spinello , a . , et al .
“
import loa loa
filariasis  three case and a review of cases report in non - endemic countries in the past two  five year .
” international journal of infectious disease one  six ( two  zero  one  two )
nine
 e six  four  nine –e six  six  two .
doi  http / / dx . doi . org /  one  zero  .  one  zero  one  six  / j . ijid .  two  zero  one  two  .  zero  five  .  one  zero  two  three .
chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
nine  five  one figure two  one  .  three  six
this loa loa worm , measure about five  five mm long , be extract from the conjunctiva of a patient with loiasis .
the loa loa have a complex life cycle .
bite deerflie native to the rain forest of central and west africa
transmit the larvae between human .
( credit a  modification of work by eballe ao , epée e , koki g , owono d , mvogo ce , bella al  credit b  modification of work by niaid  credit c  modification of work by centers for disease control nine  five  two chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and prevention ) 
describe the most common way to diagnose loiasis .
see a video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two microfilvid ) of a live loa loa microfilaria under the microscope .
parasitic skin and eye infections
the protozoan acanthamoeba and the helminth loa loa be two parasite capable of cause infection of the skin and eye .
figure two  one  .  three  seven summarize the characteristic of some common fungal infection of the skin .
figure two  one  .  three  seven summary two  one  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and eye

human skin consist of two main layer , the epidermis and dermis , which be situate on top of the hypodermis , a layer of connective tissue .

the skin be an effective physical barrier against microbial invasion .

the skin 's relatively dry environment and normal microbiota discourage colonization by transient microbe .
link to learning disease profile chapter two  one
 skin and eye infections nine  five  three 
the skin 's normal microbiota vary from one region of the body to another .

the conjunctiva of the eye be a frequent site for microbial infection , but deep eye infection be less common  multiple type of conjunctivitis exist .
two  one  .  two bacterial infections of the skin and eyes

staphylococcus and streptococcus cause many different type of skin infection , many of which occur when bacteria breach the skin barrier through a cut or wound .
 s . aureus be frequently associate with purulent skin infection that manifest as folliculitis , furuncle , or carbuncle .
s . aureus be also a lead cause of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome ( ssss ) .
 s . aureus be generally drug resistant and current mrsa strain be resistant to a wide range of antibiotic .

community - acquire and hospital - acquire staphyloccocal infection be an ongoing problem because many people be asymptomatic carrier .

group a streptococci ( gas ) , s . pyogene , be often responsible for case of cellulitis , erysipela , and erythema nosodum .
gas be also one of many possible cause of necrotize fasciitis .
 p . aeruginosa be often responsible for infection of the skin and eye , include wound and burn infection , hot tub rash , otitis externa , and bacterial keratitis .

acne be a common skin condition that can become more inflammatory when propionibacterium acne infect hair follicle and pore clog with dead skin cell and sebum .

cutaneous anthrax occur when bacillus anthracis breach the skin barrier .
the infection result in a localize black eschar on skin .
anthrax can be fatal if b . anthracis spread to the bloodstream .

common bacterial conjunctivitis be often cause by haemophilus influenzae and usually resolve on - pron - own in a few day .
more serious form of conjunctiviti include gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum , inclusion conjunctivitis ( chlamydial ) , and trachoma , all of which can lead to blindness if untreated .

keratitis be frequently cause by staphylococcus epidermidis and / or pseudomonas aeruginosa , especially among contact lens user , and can lead to blindness .

biofilms complicate the treatment of wound and eye infection because pathogen live in biofilm can be difficult to treat and eliminate .
two  one  .  three viral infections of the skin and eyes
 papillomas ( wart ) be cause by human papillomaviruse .

herpes simplex virus ( especially hsv -  one ) mainly cause oral herpe , but lesion can appear on other area of the skin and mucous membrane .

roseola and fifth disease be common viral illness that cause skin rash  roseola be cause by hhv -  six and hhv -  seven while fifth disease be cause by parvovirus one  nine .
 viral conjunctivitis be often cause by adenovirus and may be associate with the common cold .
herpe keratitis be cause by herpesviruse that spread to the eye .
two  one  .  four mycose of the skin 
mycoses can be cutaneous , subcutaneous , or systemic .

common cutaneous mycose include tinea cause by dermatophyte of the genera trichophyton , epidermophyton , and microsporum .
tinea corporis be call ringworm .
tinea on other part of the body have name associate with the affect body part .

aspergillosis be a fungal disease cause by mold of the genus aspergillus .
primary cutaneous aspergillosis enter through a break in the skin , such as the site of an injury or a surgical wound  - pron - be a common hospitalacquire infection .
in secondary cutaneous aspergillosis , the fungus enter via the respiratory system and disseminate systemically , manifest in lesion on the skin .

the most common subcutaneous mycosis be sporotrichosis ( rise gardener 's disease ) , cause by sporothrix schenkii .

yeasts of the genus candida can cause opportunistic infection of the skin call candidiasis , produce nine  five  four chapter two  one  skin and eye infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five intertrigo , localized rash , or yellow of the nail .
two  one  .  five protozoan and helminthic infections of the skin and eye

the protozoan acanthamoeba and the helminth loa loa be two parasite that can breach the skin barrier , cause infection of the skin and eye .

acanthamoeba keratitis be a parasitic infection of the eye that often result from improper disinfection of contact lense or swim while wear contact lense .

loiasis , or eye worm , be a disease endemic to africa that be cause by parasitic worm that infect the subcutaneous tissue of the skin and eye .
- pron - be transmit by deerfly vector .
chapter two  two respiratory system infections figure two  two  .  one aerosols produce by sneeze , cough , or even just speak be an important mechanism for respiratory pathogen transmission .
simple action , like cover - pron - mouth when cough or sneeze , can reduce the spread of these microbe .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chapter outline two  two  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the respiratory tract two  two  .  two bacterial infections of the respiratory tract
two  two  .  three viral infections of the respiratory tract two  two  .  four respiratory mycoses introduction
the respiratory tract be one of the main portal of entry into the human body for microbial pathogen .
on average , a human take about two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero breath each day .
this roughly correspond to one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero liter , or one  zero cubic meter , of air .
suspend within this volume of air be million of microbe of terrestrial , animal , and human origin - include many potential pathogen .
a few of these pathogen will cause relatively mild infection like sore throat and cold .
other , however , be less benign .
accord to the world health organization , respiratory tract infection such as tuberculosis , influenza , and pneumonia be responsible for more than four million death worldwide in two  zero  one  two  . [ one ]
at one time , - pron - be think that antimicrobial drug and preventive vaccine may hold respiratory infection in check in the develop world , but recent development suggest otherwise .
the rise of multiple - antibiotic resistance in organism like mycobacterium tuberculosis have render many of - pron - modern drug ineffective .
in addition , there have be a recent resurgence in disease like whooping cough and measle , once - common childhood illness make rare by effective vaccine .
despite advance in medicine and public health program , - pron - be likely that respiratory pathogen will remain formidable adversary for the foreseeable future .
two  two  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the respiratory one .
world health organization .
“
the top ten causes of death .
"
may two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheets / fs three  one  zero  / en / chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
nine  five  nine tract learning objectives
 describe the major anatomical feature of the upper and low respiratory tract 
describe the normal microbiota of the upper and low respiratory tract

explain how microorganism overcome defense of upper and low respiratory - tract membrane to cause infection 
explain how microbe and the respiratory system interact and modify each other in healthy individual and during an infection
the primary function of the respiratory tract be to exchange gas ( oxygen and carbon dioxide ) for metabolism .
however , inhalation and exhalation ( particularly when forceful ) can also serve as a vehicle of transmission for pathogen between individual .
anatomy of the upper respiratory system
the respiratory system can be conceptually divide into upper and low region at the point of the epiglottis , the structure that seal off the low respiratory system from the pharynx during swallow ( figure two  two  .  two ) .
the upper respiratory system be in direct contact with the external environment .
the naris ( or nostril ) be the external opening of the nose that lead back into the nasal cavity , a large air - fill space behind the naris .
these anatomical site constitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract , respectively .
the nasal cavity be line with hair that trap large particle , like dust and pollen , and prevent - pron - access to deep tissue .
the nasal cavity be also line with a mucous membrane and bowman 's gland that produce mucus to help trap particle and microorganism for removal .
the nasal cavity be connect to several other air - fill space .
the sinus , a set of four , pair small cavity in the skull , communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small opening .
the nasopharynx be part of the upper throat extend from the posterior nasal cavity .
the nasopharynx carry air inhale through the nose .
the middle ear be connect to the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube .
the middle ear be separate from the outer ear by the tympanic membrane , or ear drum .
and finally , the lacrimal gland drain to the nasal cavity through the nasolacrimal duct ( tear duct ) .
the open connection between these site allow microorganism to move from the nasal cavity to the sinus , middle ear ( and back ) , and down into the low respiratory tract from the nasopharynx .
part one john , a six  five  - year - old man with asthma and type two diabete , work as a sale associate at a local home improvement store .
recently , - pron - begin to feel quite ill and make an appointment with - pron - family physician .
at the clinic , john report experience headache , chest pain , coughing , and shortness of breath .
over the past day , - pron - have also experience some nausea and diarrhea .
a nurse take - pron - temperature and find that - pron - be run a fever of four  zero ° c ( one  zero  four ° f ) .
john suggest that - pron - must have a case of influenza ( flu ) , and regret that - pron - have put off get - pron - flu vaccine this year .
after listen to john 's breathing through a stethoscope , the physician order a chest radiography and collect blood , urine , and sputum sample .

base on this information , what factor may have contribute to john 's illness ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus nine  six  zero chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the oral cavity be a secondary opening for the respiratory tract .
the oral and nasal cavity connect through the fauce to the pharynx , or throat .
the pharynx can be divide into three region  the nasopharynx , the oropharynx , and the laryngopharynx .
air inhale through the mouth do not pass through the nasopharynx  - pron - proceed first through the oropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx .
the palatine tonsil , which consist of lymphoid tissue , be locate within the oropharynx .
the laryngopharynx , the last portion of the pharynx , connect to the larynx , which contain the vocal fold ( figure two  two  .  two ) .
figure two  two  .  two ( a )
the ear be connect to the upper respiratory tract by the eustachian tube , which open to the nasopharynx .
( b )
the structure of the upper respiratory tract .

identify the sequence of anatomical structure through which microbe would pass on - pron - way from the naris to the larynx .

what two anatomical point do the eustachian tube connect ?
anatomy of the lower respiratory system
the low respiratory system begin below the epiglottis in the larynx or voice box ( figure two  two  .  three ) .
the trachea , or windpipe , be a cartilaginous tube extend from the larynx that provide an unobstructed path for air to reach the lung .
the trachea bifurcate into the left and right bronchi as - pron - reach the lung .
these path branch repeatedly to form small and more extensive network of tube , the bronchiole .
the terminal bronchiole form in this treelike network end in cul - de - sacs call the alveoli .
these structure be surround by capillary network and be the site of gas exchange in the respiratory system .
human lung contain on the order of four  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero alveoli .
the outer surface of the lung be protect with a double - layer pleural membrane .
this structure protect the lung and provide lubrication to permit the lung to move easily during respiration .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  six  one figure two  two  .  three
the structure of the low respiratory tract be identify in this illustration .
( credit  modification of work by national cancer institute ) defenses of the respiratory system
the inner lining of the respiratory system consist of mucous membrane ( figure two  two  .  four ) and be protect by multiple immune defense .
the goblet cell within the respiratory epithelium secrete a layer of sticky mucus .
the viscosity and acidity of this secretion inhibit microbial attachment to the underlie cell .
in addition , the respiratory tract contain ciliate epithelial cell .
the beat cilia dislodge and propel the mucus , and any trap microbe , upward to the epiglottis , where - pron - will be swallow .
elimination of microbe in this manner be refer to as the mucociliary escalator effect and be an important mechanism that prevent inhale microorganism from migrate further into the low respiratory tract .
nine  six  two chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  four
this micrograph show the structure of the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract .
( credit  modification of micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
the upper respiratory system be under constant surveillance by mucosa - associate lymphoid tissue ( malt ) , include the adenoid and tonsil .
other mucosal defense include secrete antibody ( iga ) , lysozyme , surfactant , and antimicrobial peptide call defensin .
meanwhile , the low respiratory tract be protect by alveolar macrophage .
these phagocyte efficiently kill any microbe that manage to evade the other defense .
the combined action of these factor render the low respiratory tract nearly devoid of colonized microbe .

identify the sequence of anatomical structure through which microbe would pass on - pron - way from the larynx to the alveoli .

name some defense of the respiratory system that protect against microbial infection .
normal microbiota of the respiratory system
the upper respiratory tract contain an abundant and diverse microbiota .
the nasal passage and sinus be primarily colonize by member of the firmicutes , actinobacteria , and proteobacteria .
the most common bacteria identify include staphylococcus epidermidis , viridan group streptococci ( vgs ) , corynebacterium spp .
( diphtheroid ) , propionibacterium spp . , and haemophilus spp .
the oropharynx include many of the same isolate as the nose and sinus , with the addition of variable number of bacteria like specie of prevotella , fusobacterium , moraxella , and eikenella , as well as some candida fungal isolate .
in addition , many healthy human asymptomatically carry potential pathogen in the upper respiratory tract .
as much as two  zero % of the population carry staphylococcus aureus in - pron - nostrils . [ two ]
the pharynx , too , can be colonize with pathogenic strain of streptococcus , haemophilus , and neisseria .
two .
j . kluytmans et al .
“ nasal carriage of staphylococcus aureus  epidemiology , underlie mechanisms , and associated risks .
"
clinical microbiology reviews one  zero
no .
three
( one  nine  nine  seven  )  five  zero  five – five  two  zero .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  six  three
the low respiratory tract , by contrast , be scantily populate with microbe .
of the organism identify in the low respiratory tract , specie of pseudomonas , streptococcus , prevotella , fusobacterium , and veillonella be the most common .
- pron - be not clear at this time if these small population of bacteria constitute a normal microbiota or if - pron - be transient .
many member of the respiratory system
's normal microbiota be opportunistic pathogen .
to proliferate and cause host damage , - pron - first must overcome the immune defense of respiratory tissue .
many mucosal pathogen produce virulence factor such as adhesin that mediate attachment to host epithelial cell , or polysaccharide capsule that allow microbe to evade phagocytosis .
the endotoxin of gram - negative bacteria can stimulate a strong inflammatory response that damage respiratory cell .
other pathogen produce exotoxin , and still other have the ability to survive within the host cell .
once an infection of the respiratory tract be establish , - pron - tend to impair the mucociliary escalator , limit the body 's ability to expel the invade microbe , thus make - pron - easy for pathogen to multiply and spread .
vaccine have be develop for many of the most serious bacterial and viral pathogen .
several of the most important respiratory pathogen and - pron - vaccine , if available , be summarize in table two  two  .  one .
component of these vaccine will be explain later in the chapter .
some important respiratory diseases and vaccines disease pathogen available vaccine ( s ) [ three ]
chickenpox / shingle
varicella - zoster virus varicella ( chickenpox ) vaccine , herpe zoster ( shingle ) vaccine
common cold rhinovirus none diphtheria corynebacterium diphtheriae dtap , tdap , dt , td , dtp epiglottitis ,
otitis medium haemophilus influenzae
hib influenza influenza viruse inactivate ,
flumist measles measles virus mmr pertussis bordetella pertussis dtap , tdap pneumonia streptococcus pneumoniae pneumococcal conjugate vaccine ( pcv one  three ) , pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine ( ppsv two  three ) rubella ( german measle )
rubella virus mmr severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) sars - associate coronavirus ( sarscov ) none tuberculosis mycobacterium tuberculosis bcg table two  two  .  one three .
full name of vaccine list in table  haemophilus influenzae type b ( hib )  diphtheria , tetanus , and acellular pertussis ( dtap )  tetanus , diphtheria , and acellular pertussis ( tdap )  diphtheria and tetanus ( dt )  tetanus and diphtheria ( td )  diphtheria , pertussis , and tetanus ( dtp )  bacillus calmette - guérin  measles , mump , rubella ( mmr )
nine  six  four chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be some pathogenic bacteria that be part of the normal microbiota of the respiratory tract ?

what virulence factor be use by pathogen to overcome the immune protection of the respiratory tract ?
sign and symptoms of respiratory infection microbial disease of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response .
these infection can be group by the location affect and have name end in " itis " , which literally mean inflammation of .
for instance , rhinitis be an inflammation of the nasal cavity , often characteristic of the common cold .
rhinitis may also be associate with hay fever allergy or other irritant .
inflammation of the sinus be call sinusitis inflammation of the ear be call otitis .
otitis media be an inflammation of the middle ear .
a variety of microbe can cause pharyngitis , commonly know as a sore throat .
an inflammation of the larynx be call laryngitis .
the result inflammation may interfere with vocal cord function , cause voice loss .
when tonsil be inflame , - pron - be call tonsillitis .
chronic case of tonsillitis may be treat surgically with tonsillectomy .
more rarely , the epiglottis can be infect , a condition call epiglottitis .
in the low respiratory system , the inflammation of the bronchial tube result in bronchitis .
most serious of all be pneumonia , in which the alveoli in the lung be infect and become inflamed .
pus and edema accumulate and fill the alveoli with fluid ( call consolidation ) .
this reduce the lung ' ability to exchange gas and often result in a productive cough expel phlegm and mucus .
case of pneumonia can range from mild to life - threaten , and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old .

describe the typical symptom of rhinitis , sinusitis , pharyngitis , and laryngitis .
smoking - associated pneumonia camila be a two  two  - year - old student who have be a chronic smoker for five year .
recently , - pron - develop a persistent cough that have not respond to over - the - counter treatment .
- pron - doctor order a chest radiograph to investigate .
the radiological result be consistent with pneumonia .
in addition , streptococcus pneumoniae be isolate from camila 's sputum .
smoker be at a great risk of develop pneumonia than the general population .
several component of tobacco smoke have be demonstrate to impair the lung ' immune defense .
these effect include disrupt the function of the ciliated epithelial cell , inhibit phagocytosis , and block the action of antimicrobial peptide .
together , these lead to a dysfunction of the mucociliary escalator effect .
the organism trap in the mucus be therefore able to colonize the lung and cause infection rather than be expel or swallow .
case in point chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  six  five two  two  .  two bacterial infections of the respiratory tract learning objectives
 identify the most common bacteria that can cause infection of the upper and low respiratory tract  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease of the respiratory tract
the respiratory tract can be infect by a variety of bacteria , both gram positive and gram negative .
although the disease that - pron - cause may range from mild to severe , in most case , the microbe remain localize within the respiratory system .
fortunately , most of these infection also respond well to antibiotic therapy .
streptococcal infections
a common upper respiratory infection , streptococcal pharyngitis ( strep throat ) be cause by streptococcus pyogene .
this gram - positive bacterium appear as chain of cocci , as see in figure two  two  .  five .
rebecca lancefield serologically classify streptococci in the one  nine  three  zero use carbohydrate antigen from the bacterial cell wall .
s . pyogene be the sole member of the lancefield group
a streptococci and be often refer to as gas , or group
a strep .
figure two  two  .  five
this scan electron micrograph of streptococcus pyogene show the characteristic cellular phenotype resembling chain of cocci .
( credit  modification of work by u . s . centers for disease control and prevention - medical illustrator ) similar to streptococcal infection of the skin , the mucosal membrane of the pharynx be damage by the release of a variety of exoenzyme and exotoxin by this extracellular pathogen .
many strain of s . pyogene can degrade connective tissue by use hyaluronidase , collagenase and streptokinase .
streptokinase activate plasmin , which lead to degradation of fibrin and , in turn , dissolution of blood clot , which assist in the spread of the pathogen .
release toxin include streptolysin that can destroy red and white blood cell .
the classic sign of streptococcal pharyngitis be a fever high than three  eight ° c ( one  zero  zero  .  four ° f )  intense pharyngeal pain  erythema associate with pharyngeal inflammation  and swollen , dark - red palatine tonsil , often dot with patch of pus  and petechiae ( microcapillary hemorrhage ) on the soft or hard palate ( roof of the mouth ) ( figure two  two  .  six ) .
the submandibular lymph node beneath the angle of the jaw be also often swollen during strep throat .
some strain of group a streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin .
this exotoxin be encode by a temperate bacteriophage ( bacterial virus ) and be an example of phage conversion ( see the viral life cycle ) .
the toxin attack the plasma membrane of capillary endothelial cell and lead to scarlet fever ( or scarlatina ) , a disseminated fine red rash on the skin , and strawberry tongue , a red rash on the tongue ( figure two  two  .  six ) .
severe case may even lead to nine  six  six chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five streptococcal toxic shock syndrome ( stss ) , which result from massive superantigen production that lead to septic shock and death .
s . pyogene can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through cough and sneeze .
the disease can be diagnose quickly use a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group a antigen .
however , due to a significant rate of false - negative result ( up to three  zero %[ four ] ) , culture identification be still the gold standard to confirm pharyngitis due to s . pyogene .
s . pyogene can be identify as a catalase - negative , beta hemolytic bacterium that be susceptible to zero  .  zero  four unit of bacitracin .
antibiotic resistance be limited for this bacterium , so most β - lactam remain effective  oral amoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin g be those most commonly prescribe .
figure two  two  .  six streptococcal infection of the respiratory tract may cause localize pharyngitis or systemic sign and symptom .
( a ) the characteristic appearance of strep throat  bright red arch of inflammation with the presence of dark - red spot ( petechiae ) .
( b ) scarlet fever present as a rash on the skin .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by alicia williams )
sequelae of s . pyogene infections
one reason strep throat infection be aggressively treat with antibiotic be because - pron - can lead to serious sequelae , later clinical consequence of a primary infection .
- pron - be estimate that one %– three % of untreated s . pyogene infection can be follow by nonsuppurative ( without the production of pus ) sequelae that develop one – three week after the acute infection have resolve .
two such sequela be acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis .
acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis cause by specific rheumatogenic strain of s . pyogene ( strain one , three , five , six , and one  eight ) .
although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remain unclear , molecular mimicry between the m protein of rheumatogenic strain of s . pyogene and heart tissue be think to initiate the autoimmune attack .
the most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever be damage to and inflammation of the heart ( carditis ) .
acute glomerulonephritis also result from an immune response to streptococcal antigen follow pharyngitis and cutaneous infection .
acute glomerulonephritis develop within six – one  zero day after pharyngitis , but can take up to two  one day after a cutaneous infection .
similar to acute rheumatic fever , there be strong association between specific nephritogenic strain of s . pyogene and acute glomerulonephritis , and evidence suggest a role for antigen mimicry and autoimmunity .
however , the primary mechanism of acute glomerulonephritis appear to be the formation of immune complex between s . pyogene antigen and antibody , and - pron - deposition between endothelial cell of the glomeruli of kidney .
inflammatory response against the immune complex lead to damage and inflammation of the glomeruli ( glomerulonephritis ) .
four .
wl
lean et al .
“
rapid diagnostic tests for group a streptococcal pharyngitis 
a meta - analysis .
"
pediatrics one  three  four , no .
four
( two  zero  one  four  )  seven  seven  one – seven  eight  one .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  six  seven

what be the symptom of strep throat ?

what be erythrogenic toxin and
what effect do - pron - have ?

what be the cause of rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis ?
acute otitis media
an infection of the middle ear be call acute otitis medium ( aom ) , but often - pron - be simply refer to as an earache .
the condition be most common between age three month and three year .
in the united states , aom be the second - lead cause of visit to pediatrician by child young than age five year , and - pron - be the lead indication for antibiotic prescription . [ five ]
aom be characterize by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear .
unable to drain , the pus build up , result in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia ( ear pain ) .
inflammation result from the infection lead to swell of the eustachian tube , and may also lead to fever , nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea , particularly in infant .
infant and toddler who can not yet speak may exhibit nonverbal sign suggest aom , such as hold , tug , or rubbing of the ear , as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the pain .
aom can be cause by a variety of bacteria .
among neonate , s . pneumoniae be the most common cause of aom , but escherichia coli , enterococcus spp . , and group b streptococcus specie can also be involve .
in old infant and child young than one  four year old , the most common bacterial cause be s . pneumoniae , haemophilus influenzae , or moraxella catarrhalis .
among s . pneumoniae infection , encapsulated strain be frequent cause of aom .
by contrast , the strain of h . influenzae and m . cattarhalis that be responsible for aom do not possess a capsule .
rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogen , bacterial component such as lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) in gramnegative pathogen induce an inflammatory response that cause swell , pus , and tissue damage within the middle ear ( figure two  two  .  seven ) .
any blockage of the eustachian tube , with or without infection , can cause fluid to become trap and accumulate in the middle ear .
this be refer to as otitis medium with effusion ( ome ) .
the accumulated fluid offer an excellent reservoir for microbial growth and , consequently , secondary bacterial infection often ensue .
this can lead to recur and chronic earache , which be especially common in young child .
the high incidence in child can be attribute to many factor .
child have more upper respiratory infection , in general , and - pron - eustachian tube be also short and drain at a shallower angle .
young child also tend to spend more time lie down than adult , which facilitate drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear .
bottle feeding while lie down enhance this risk because the suck action on the bottle cause negative pressure to build up within the eustachian tube , promote the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx .
diagnosis be typically make base on clinical sign and symptom , without laboratory testing to determine the specific causative agent .
antibiotic be frequently prescribe for the treatment of aom .
high - dose amoxicillin be the first - line drug , but with increase resistance concern , macrolide and cephalosporin may also be use .
the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine ( pcv one  three ) contain serotype that be important cause of aom , and vaccination have be show to decrease the incidence of aom .
vaccination against influenza have also be show to decrease the risk for aom , likely because viral infection like influenza predispose patient to secondary infection with s . pneumoniae .
although there be a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype b of h . influenzae , this vaccine do not impact the incidence of h . influenzae aom .
because unencapsulated strain of h . influenzae and m . catarrhalis be involve in aom , vaccine against bacterial cellular factor other than capsule will need to be develop .
five .
g . worrall .
“ acute otitis media .
"
canadian family physician five  three
no .
one  two ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  two  one  four  seven – two  one  four  eight . nine  six  eight
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  seven ( a ) a healthy tympanic membrane  the middle ear bone can be see behind the membrane .
( b )
an ear with chronic inflammation that have result in a tear membrane , erosion of the inner ear bone , and mucus buildup .
( credit a  modification of work by “ drer . tv” / youtube  credit b  modification of work by li mg , hotez pj , vrabec jt , donovan dt )
bacterial rhinosinusitis
the microbial community of the nasopharynx be extremely diverse and harbor many opportunistic pathogen , so - pron - be perhaps not surprising that infection lead to rhinitis and sinusitis have many possible cause .
these condition often occur as secondary infection after a viral infection , which effectively compromise the immune defense and allow the opportunistic bacteria to establish - pron - .
bacterial sinusitis involve infection and inflammation within the paranasal sinuse .
because bacterial sinusitis rarely occur without rhinitis , the preferred term be rhinosinusitis .
the most common cause of bacterial rhinosinusitis be similar to those for aom , include s . pneumoniae , h . influenzae , and m . catarrhalis .

what be the usual causative agent of acute otitis medium ?

what factor facilitate acute otitis medium with effusion in young child ?

what factor often trigger bacterial rhinosinusitis ?
diphtheria
the causative agent of diphtheria , corynebacterium diphtheriae , be a club - shape , gram - positive rod that belong to the phylum actinobacteria .
diphtheroid be common member of the normal nasopharyngeal microbiota .
however , some strain of c . diphtheriae become pathogenic because of the presence of a temperate bacteriophage - encode protein - the diphtheria toxin .
diphtheria be typically a respiratory infection of the oropharynx but can also cause impetigo - like lesion on the skin .
although the disease can affect people of all age , - pron - tend to be most severe in those young than five year or old than four  zero year .
like strep throat , diphtheria be commonly transmit in the droplet and aerosol produce by cough .
after colonize the throat , the bacterium remain in the oral cavity and begin chapter two  two 
respiratory system infections nine  six  nine produce the diphtheria toxin .
this protein be an a - b toxin that block host - cell protein synthesis by inactivate elongation factor ( ef ) -  two ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) .
the toxin 's action lead to the death of the host cell and an inflammatory response .
an accumulation of grayish exudate consist of dead host cell , pu , red blood cell , fibrin , and infectious bacteria result in the formation of a pseudomembrane .
the pseudomembrane can cover mucous membrane of the nasal cavity , tonsil , pharynx , and larynx ( figure two  two  .  eight ) .
this be a classic sign of diphtheria .
as the disease progress , the pseudomembrane can enlarge to obstruct the fauce of the pharynx or trachea and can lead to suffocation and death .
sometimes , intubation , the placement of a breathing tube in the trachea , be require in advanced infection .
if the diphtheria toxin spread throughout the body , - pron - can damage other tissue as well .
this can include myocarditis ( heart damage ) and nerve damage that may impair breathing .
figure two  two  .  eight
the pseudomembrane in a patient with diphtheria present as a leathery gray patch consist of dead cell , pu , fibrin , red blood cell , and infectious microbe .
( credit  modification of work by putnong n , agustin g , pasubillo m , miyagi k , dimaano em )
the presumptive diagnosis of diphtheria be primarily base on the clinical symptom ( i . e . , the pseudomembrane ) and vaccination history , and be typically confirm by identify bacterial culture obtain from throat swab .
the diphtheria toxin - pron - can be directly detect in vitro use polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) - based , direct detection system for the diphtheria tox gene , and immunological technique like radial immunodiffusion or elek 's immunodiffusion test .
broad - spectrum antibiotic like penicillin and erythromycin tend to effectively control c . diphtheriae infection .
regrettably , - pron - have no effect against preformed toxin .
if toxin production have already occur in the patient , antitoxin ( preformed antibody against the toxin ) be administer .
although this be effective in neutralize the toxin , the antitoxin may lead to serum sickness because - pron - be produce in horse ( see hypersensitivities ) .
widespread vaccination effort have reduce the occurrence of diphtheria worldwide .
there be currently four combination toxoid vaccine available that provide protection against diphtheria and other disease  dtap , tdap , dt , and td .
in all case , the letter “ d , " “ t , " and “ p " stand for diphtheria , tetanus , and pertussis , respectively  the “ a " stand for acellular .
if capitalize , the letter indicate a full - strength dose  lowercase letter indicate reduce dosage .
accord to current recommendation , child should receive five dos of the dtap vaccine in - pron - youth and a td booster every one  zero year .
child with adverse reaction to the pertussis vaccine may be give the dt vaccine in place of the dtap . nine  seven  zero chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what effect do diphtheria toxin have ?

what be the pseudomembrane compose of ?
bacterial pneumonia pneumonia be a general term for infection of the lung that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluid and white blood cell in the alveoli .
pneumonia can be cause by bacteria , virus , fungus , and other organism , although the vast majority of pneumonia be bacterial in origin .
bacterial pneumonia be a prevalent , potentially serious infection  - pron - cause more five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death in the united states in two  zero  one  four  . [ six ]
as the alveoli fill with fluid and white blood cell ( consolidation ) , air exchange become impair and patient experience respiratory distress ( figure two  two  .  nine ) .
in addition , pneumonia can lead to pleurisy , an infection of the pleural membrane surround the lung , which can make breathing very painful .
although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the right circumstance , three bacterial specie cause most clinical case  streptococcus pneumoniae , h . influenzae , and mycoplasma pneumoniae .
in addition to these , - pron - will also examine some of the less common cause of pneumonia .
figure two  two  .  nine
a chest radiograph of a patient with pneumonia show the consolidation ( lesion ) present as opaque patch .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
pneumococcal pneumonia
the most common cause of community - acquire bacterial pneumonia be streptococcus pneumoniae .
this grampositive , alpha hemolytic streptococcus be commonly find as part of the normal microbiota of the human respiratory tract .
the cell tend to be somewhat lancet - shape and typically appear as pair ( figure two  two  .  one  zero ) .
the pneumococci initially colonize the bronchiole of the lung .
eventually , the infection spread to the alveoli , where the microbe 's polysaccharide capsule interfere with phagocytic clearance .
other virulence factor include autolysin like lyt a , which degrade the microbial cell wall , result in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic virulence factor .
one of these factor , pneumolysin o , be important in disease progression  this pore - form protein damage host cell , promote bacterial adherence , and enhance pro - inflammatory cytokine production .
the result inflammatory response cause the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophil and red blood cell .
as a consequence , infect individual develop a productive cough with bloody sputum .
six .
kd kochanek et al .
“
death  final data for two  zero  one  four .
"
national vital statistics report six  five no four ( two  zero  one  six ) .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  seven  one figure two  two  .  one  zero ( a )
this micrograph of streptococcus pneumoniae grow from a blood culture show the characteristic lancet - shape diplococcal morphology .
( b ) a colorized scan electron micrograph of s . pneumoniae .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention )
pneumococci can be presumptively identify by - pron - distinctive gram - positive , lancet - shape cell morphology and diplococcal arrangement .
in blood agar culture , the organism demonstrate alpha hemolytic colony that be autolytic after two  four to four  eight hour .
in addition , s . pneumoniae be extremely sensitive to optochin and colony be rapidly destroy by the addition of one  zero % solution of sodium deoxycholate .
all clinical pneumococcal isolate be serotype use the quellung reaction with typing antisera produce by the cdc .
positive quellung reaction be consider definitive identification of pneumococci .
antibiotic remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci .
β - lactams like penicillin be the first - line drug , but resistance to β - lactam be a grow problem .
when β - lactam resistance be a concern , macrolide and fluoroquinolone may be prescribe .
however , s . pneumoniae resistance to macrolide and fluoroquinolone be increase as well , limit the therapeutic option for some infection .
there be currently two pneumococcal vaccine available  pneumococcal conjugate vaccine ( pcv one  three ) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine ( ppsv two  three ) .
these be generally give to the most vulnerable population of individual  child young than two year and adult old than six  five year .
haemophilus pneumonia encapsulate
strain of haemophilus influenzae be know for cause meningitis , but nonencapsulated strain be important cause of pneumonia .
this small , gram - negative coccobacillus be find in the pharynx of the majority of healthy child  however , haemophilus pneumonia be primarily see in the elderly .
like other pathogen that cause pneumonia , h . influenzae be spread by droplet and aerosol produce by cough .
a fastidious organism , h . influenzae will only grow on medium with available factor x ( hemin ) and factor v ( nad ) , like chocolate agar ( figure two  two  .  one  one ) .
serotyping must be perform to confirm identity of h . influenzae isolate .
infection of the alveoli by h . influenzae result in inflammation and accumulation of fluid .
increase resistance to β - lactam , macrolide , and tetracycline present challenge for the treatment of haemophilus pneumonia .
resistance to the fluoroquinolone be rare among isolate of h . influenzae but have be observe .
as discuss for aom , a vaccine direct against nonencapsulate h . influenzae , if develop , would provide protection against pneumonia cause by this pathogen .
nine  seven  two chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  one  one culture of haemophilus influenzae on a chocolate agar plate .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
why - pron - ?
tracy be a six  - year old who develop a serious cough that would not seem to go away .
after two week , - pron - parent become concerned and take - pron - to the pediatrician , who suspect a case of bacterial pneumonia .
test confirm that the cause be haemophilus influenzae .
fortunately , tracy respond well to antibiotic treatment and eventually make a full recovery .
because there have be several other case of bacterial pneumonia at tracy 's elementary school , local health official urge parent to have - pron - child screen .
of the child who be screen , - pron - be discover that great than five  zero % carry h . influenzae in - pron - nasal cavity , yet all but two of - pron - be asymptomatic .
why be - pron - that some individual become seriously ill from bacterial infection that seem to have little or no effect on other ?
the pathogenicity of an organism - - pron - ability to cause host damage - be not solely a property of the microorganism .
rather , - pron - be the product of a complex relationship between the microbe 's virulence factor and the immune defense of the individual .
preexist condition and environmental factor such as exposure to secondhand smoke can make some individual more susceptible to infection by produce condition favorable to microbial growth or compromise the immune system .
in addition , individual may have genetically determine immune factor that protect - pron - - or not - from particular strain of pathogen .
the interaction between these host factor and the pathogenicity factor produce by the microorganism ultimately determine the outcome of the infection .
a clear understanding of these interaction may allow for well identification of at - risk individual and prophylactic intervention in the future .
mycoplasma pneumonia ( walk pneumonia )
primary atypical pneumonia be cause by mycoplasma pneumoniae .
this bacterium be not part of the respiratory tract 's normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreak .
also know as walk pneumonia , mycoplasma pneumonia infection be common in crowded environment like college campus and military basis .
- pron - be spread by aerosol form when cough or sneeze .
the disease be often mild , with a low fever and persistent cough .
these bacteria , which do not have cell wall , use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to ciliated cell .
in the process , epithelial cell be damage and the proper function of the cilia be hinder ( figure two  two  .  one  two ) .
case in point chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  seven  three mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured .
therefore , penicillin and thallium acetate be add to agar to prevent the overgrowth by faster - grow potential contaminant .
since m . pneumoniae do not have a cell wall , - pron - be resistant to these substance .
without a cell wall , the microbial cell appear pleomorphic .
m . pneumoniae infection tend to be self - limit but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy .
β - lactam , which target cell wall synthesis , be not indicate for treatment of infection with this pathogen .
figure two  two  .  one  two
the micrograph show mycoplasma pneumoniae use - pron - specialized receptor to attach to epithelial cell in the trachea of an infected hamster .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
chlamydial pneumonias and psittacosis chlamydial pneumonia can be cause by three different specie of bacteria  chlamydophila pneumoniae ( formerly know as chlamydia pneumoniae ) , chlamydophila psittaci ( formerly know as chlamydia psittaci ) , and chlamydia trachomatis .
all three be obligate intracellular pathogen and cause mild to severe pneumonia and bronchitis .
of the three , chlamydophila pneumoniae be the most common and be transmit via respiratory droplet or aerosol .
c . psittaci cause psittacosis , a zoonotic disease that primarily affect domesticate bird such as parakeet , turkey , and duck , but can be transmit from bird to human .
psittacosis be a relatively rare infection and be typically find in people who work with bird .
chlamydia trachomatis , the causative agent of the sexually transmit disease chlamydia , can cause pneumonia in infant when the infection be pass from mother to baby during birth .
diagnosis of chlamydia by culture tend to be difficult and slow .
because - pron - be intracellular pathogen , - pron - require multiple passage through tissue culture .
recently , a variety of pcr - and serologically base test have be develop to enable easy identification of these pathogen .
tetracycline and macrolide antibiotic be typically prescribe for treatment .
health care - associated pneumonia
a variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individual be common cause of health care - associate pneumonia .
these include klebsiella pneumoniae , staphylococcus aureus , and proteobacteria such as specie of escherichia , proteus , and serratia .
patient at risk include the elderly , those who have other preexist lung condition , and those who be immunocompromised .
in addition , patient receive supportive therapy such as intubation , antibiotic , and immunomodulatory drug may also be at risk because these intervention disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defense .
invasive medical device such as nine  seven  four chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five catheter , medical implant , and ventilator can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia - cause pathogen into the body . [ seven
] pneumonia cause by k . pneumoniae be characterize by lung necrosis and " currant jelly sputum , " so name because - pron - consist of clump of blood , mucus , and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produce by the bacterium .
k . pneumoniae be often multidrug resistant .
aminoglycoside and cephalosporin be often prescribe but be not always effective .
klebsiella pneumonia be frequently fatal even when treat .
pseudomonas pneumonia pseudomonas aeruginosa be another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious case of bacterial pneumonia in patient with cystic fibrosis ( cf ) and hospitalize patient assist with artificial ventilator .
this bacterium be extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxin .
ventilator - associate pneumonia with p . aeruginosa be cause by contaminate equipment that cause the pathogen to be aspirate into the lung .
in patient with cf , a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor ( cftr ) lead to the accumulation of excess dry mucus in the lung .
this decrease the effectiveness of the defensin and inhibit the mucociliary escalator .
p . aeruginosa be know to infect more than half of all patient with cf .
- pron - adapt to the condition in the patient 's lung and begin to produce alginate , a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibit the mucociliary escalator .
lung damage from the chronic inflammatory response that ensue be the lead cause of mortality in patient with cf . [ eight ]

what three pathogen be responsible for the most prevalent type of bacterial pneumonia ?

which cause of pneumonia be most likely to affect young people ?

in what contexts do pseudomonas aeruginosa cause pneumonia ?
part two john 's chest radiograph reveal an extensive consolidation in the right lung , and - pron - sputum culture reveal the presence of a gram - negative rod .
- pron - physician prescribe a course of the antibiotic clarithromycin .
- pron - also order the rapid influenza diagnostic test ( ridts ) for type a and b influenza to rule out a possible underlying viral infection .
despite antibiotic therapy , john 's condition continue to deteriorate , so - pron - be admit to the hospital .

what be some possible cause of pneumonia that would not have respond to the prescribed antibiotic ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
tuberculosis tuberculosis ( tb ) be one of the deadly infectious disease in human history .
although tuberculosis infection rate in the united states be extremely low , the cdc estimate that about one - third of the world 's population be infect clinical focus seven .
sm koenig et al .
“
ventilator - associated pneumonia  diagnosis , treatment , and prevention .
"
clinical microbiology reviews one  nine
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  six  )  six  three  seven – six  five  seven . eight .
r .
sordé et al .
“
management of refractory pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis .
”
infection and drug resistance four
( two  zero  one  one  )  three  one – four  one .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  seven  five with mycobacterium tuberculosis , the causal organism of tb , with nine  .  six million new tb case and one  .  five million death worldwide in two  zero  one  four  . [ nine ] m . tuberculosis be an acid - fast , high g + c , gram - positive , nonspore - form rod .
- pron - cell wall be rich in waxy mycolic acid , which make the cell impervious to polar molecule .
- pron - also cause these organism to grow slowly .
m . tuberculosis cause a chronic granulomatous disease that can infect any area of the body , although - pron - be typically associate with the lung .
m . tuberculosis be spread by inhalation of respiratory droplet or aerosol from an infected person .
the infectious dose of m . tuberculosis be only one  zero cells . [ one  zero ]
after inhalation , the bacteria enter the alveoli ( figure two  two  .  one  three ) .
the cell be phagocytize by macrophage but can survive and multiply within these phagocyte because of the protection by the waxy mycolic acid in - pron - cell wall .
if not eliminate by macrophage , the infection can progress , cause an inflammatory response and an accumulation of neutrophil and macrophage in the area .
several week or month may pass before an immunological response be mount by t cell and b cell .
eventually , the lesion in the alveoli become wall off , form small round lesion call tubercle .
bacteria continue to be release into the center of the tubercle and the chronic immune response result in tissue damage and induction of apoptosis ( program host - cell death ) in a process call liquefaction .
this create a caseous center , or air pocket , where the aerobic m . tuberculosis can grow and multiply .
tubercle may eventually rupture and bacterial cell can invade pulmonary capillary  from there , bacteria can spread through the bloodstream to other organ , a condition know as miliary tuberculosis .
the rupture of tubercle also facilitate transmission of the bacteria to other individual via droplet aerosol that exit the body in cough .
because these droplet can be very small and stay aloft for a long time , special precaution be necessary when care for patient with tb , such as the use of face mask and negative - pressure ventilation and filtering system .
eventually , most lesion heal to form calcify ghon complex .
these structure be visible on chest radiograph and be a useful diagnostic feature .
but even after the disease have apparently end , viable bacteria remain sequestered in these location .
release of these organism at a later time can produce reactivation tuberculosis ( or secondary tb ) .
this be mainly observe in people with alcoholism , the elderly , or in otherwise immunocompromise individual ( figure two  two  .  one  three ) .
nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
tuberculosis ( tb ) .
data and statistics .
” http / / www . cdc . gov / tb / statistics / default . htm one  zero .
d . saini et al .
“
ultra - low dose of mycobacterium tuberculosis aerosol create partial infection in mice .
"
tuberculosis nine  two
no .
two ( two  zero  one  two  )  one  six  zero – one  six  five
. nine  seven  six chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  one  three
in the infectious cycle of tuberculosis , the immune response of most infect individual ( approximately nine  zero % ) result in the formation of tubercle in which the infection be walled off . [ one  one ]
the remainder will suffer progressive primary tuberculosis .
the sequestered bacteria may be reactivate to form secondary tuberculosis in immunocompromised patient at a later time .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
because tb be a chronic disease , chemotherapeutic treatment often continue for month or year .
multidrug resistant ( mdr - tb ) and extensively drug - resistant ( xdr - tb ) strain of m . tuberculosis be a grow clinical concern .
these strain can arise due to misuse or mismanagement of antibiotic therapy .
therefore , - pron - be imperative that proper one  one .
g . kaplan et al .
“
mycobacterium tuberculosis growth at the cavity surface  a microenvironment with failed immunity .
”
infection and immunity seven  one no .  one  two ( two  zero  zero  three  )  seven  zero  nine  nine – seven  one  zero  eight .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  seven  seven multidrug protocol be use to treat these infection .
common antibiotic include in these mixture be isoniazid , rifampin , ethambutol , and pyrazinamide .
a tb vaccine be available that be base on the so - call bacillus calmette - guérin ( bcg ) strain of m . bovi commonly find in cattle .
in the united states , the bcg vaccine be only give to health - care worker and member of the military who be at risk of exposure to active case of tb .
- pron - be use more broadly worldwide .
many individual bear in other country have be vaccinate with bcg strain .
bcg be use in many country with a high prevalence of tb , to prevent childhood tuberculous meningitis and miliary disease .
the mantoux tuberculin skin test ( figure two  two  .  one  four ) be regularly use in the united states to screen for potential tb exposure ( see hypersensitivities ) .
however , prior vaccination with the bcg vaccine can cause false - positive result .
chest radiograph to detect ghon complex formation be require , therefore , to confirm exposure .
figure two  two  .  one  four ( a )
the mantoux skin test for tuberculosis involve inject the subject with tuberculin protein derivative .
the injection should initially produce a raise wheal .
( b )
the test should be read in four  eight – seven  two hour .
a positive result be indicate by redness , swelling , or hardness  the size of the respond region be measure to determine the final result .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
these short animation ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two mycotublegpnean ) discuss the infection strategy of mycobacterium tuberculosis and legionella pneumophila .

what characteristic of mycobacterium tuberculosis allow - pron - to evade the immune response ?

what happen to cause miliary tuberculosis ?

explain the limitation of the mantoux tuberculin skin test .
pertussis ( whooping cough )
the causative agent of pertussis , commonly call whooping cough , be bordetella pertussis , a gram - negative coccobacillus .
the disease be characterize by mucus accumulation in the lung that lead to a long period of severe coughing .
sometimes , follow a bout of coughing , a sound resemble a " whoop " be produce as air be inhale link to learn nine  seven  eight chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five through the inflamed and restrict airway
- hence the name whooping cough .
although adult can be infect , the symptom of this disease be most pronounced in infant and child .
pertussis be highly communicable through droplet transmission , so the uncontrollable coughing produce be an efficient mean of transmit the disease in a susceptible population .
follow inhalation , b . pertussis specifically attach to epithelial cell use an adhesin , filamentous hemagglutinin .
the bacteria then grow at the site of infection and cause disease symptom through the production of exotoxin .
one of the main virulence factor of this organism be an a - b exotoxin call the pertussis toxin ( pt ) .
when pt enter the host cell , - pron - increase the cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( camp ) level and disrupt cellular signaling .
pt be know to enhance inflammatory response involve histamine and serotonin .
in addition to pt , b . pertussis produce a tracheal cytotoxin that damage ciliate epithelial cell and result in accumulation of mucus in the lung .
the mucus can support the colonization and growth of other microbe and , as a consequence , secondary infection be common .
together , the effect of these factor produce the cough that characterize this infection .
a pertussis infection can be divide into three distinct stage .
the initial infection , term the catarrhal stage , be relatively mild and unremarkable .
the sign and symptom may include nasal congestion , a runny nose , sneeze , and a low - grade fever .
this , however , be the stage in which b . pertussis be most infectious .
in the paroxysmal stage , mucus accumulation lead to uncontrollable cough spasm that can last for several minute and frequently induce vomiting .
the paroxysmal stage can last for several week .
a long convalescence stage follow the paroxysmal stage , during which time patient experience a chronic cough that can last for up to several month .
in fact , the disease be sometimes call the one  zero  zero  - day cough .
in infant , coughing can be forceful enough to cause fracture to the rib , and prolonged infection can lead to death .
the cdc report two  zero pertussis - relate death in two  zero  one  two  , [ one  two ] but that number have decline to five by two  zero  one  five  . [ one  three ]
during the first two week of infection , laboratory diagnosis be best perform by culture the organism directly from a nasopharyngeal ( np ) specimen collect from the posterior nasopharynx .
the np speciman be streak onto bordet -
gengou medium .
the specimen must be transport to the laboratory as quickly as possible , even if transport medium be use .
transport time of long than two  four hour reduce the viability of b . pertussis significantly .
within the first month of infection , b . pertussis can be diagnose use pcr technique .
during the later stage of infection , pertussis - specific antibody can be immunologically detect use an enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisa ) .
pertussis be generally a self - limit disease .
antibiotic therapy with erythromycin or tetracycline be only effective at the very early stage of disease .
antibiotic give later in the infection , and prophylactically to uninfected individual , reduce the rate of transmission .
active vaccination be a well approach to control this disease .
the dpt vaccine be once in common use in the united states .
in that vaccine , the p component consist of kill whole - cell b . pertussis preparation .
because of some adverse effect , that preparation have now be supersede by the dtap and tdap vaccine .
in both of these new vaccine , the “ ap " component be a pertussis toxoid .
widespread vaccination have greatly reduce the number of report case and prevent large epidemic of pertussis .
recently , however , pertussis have begin to reemerge as a childhood disease in some state because of decline vaccination rate and an increase population of susceptible child .
one  two .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ two  zero  one  two
final pertussis surveillance report .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / pertussis / downloads / pertuss - surv - report -  two  zero  one  two  . pdf .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
one  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ two  zero  one  five provisional pertussis surveillance report .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / pertussis / download / pertuss - surv - report -  two  zero  one  five  - provisional . pdf .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  seven  nine
this web page ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two pertussaudio ) contain an audio clip of the distinctive " whooping " sound associate with pertussis in infant .
this interactive map ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two intmapprevacc ) show outbreak of vaccine preventable disease , include pertussis , around the world .

what account for the mucus production in a pertussis infection ?

what be the sign and symptom associate with the three stage of pertussis ?

why be pertussis become more common in the united states ?
legionnaire disease
an atypical pneumonia call legionnaires disease ( also know as legionellosis ) be cause by an aerobic gramnegative bacillus , legionella pneumophila .
this bacterium infect free - living amoebae that inhabit moist environment , and infection typically occur from human - make reservoir such as air - conditioning cool tower , humidifier , misting system , and fountain .
aerosol from these reservoir can lead to infection of susceptible individual , especially those suffer from chronic heart or lung disease or other condition that weaken the immune system .
when l . pneumophila bacteria enter the alveoli , - pron - be phagocytize by resident macrophage .
however , l . pneumophila use a secretion system to insert protein in the endosomal membrane of the macrophage  these protein prevent lysosomal fusion , allow l . pneumophila to continue to proliferate within the phagosome .
the result respiratory disease can range from mild to severe pneumonia , depend on the status of the host 's immune defense .
although this disease primarily affect the lung , - pron - can also cause fever , nausea , vomiting , confusion , and other neurological effect .
diagnosis of legionnaires disease be somewhat complicated .
l . pneumophila be a fastidious bacterium and be difficult to culture .
in addition , since the bacterial cell be not efficiently stain with the gram stain , other staining technique , such as the warthin - starry silver - precipitate procedure , must be use to visualize this pathogen .
a rapid diagnostic test have be develop that detect the presence of legionella antigen in a patient 's urine  result take less than one hour , and the test have high selectivity and specificity ( great than nine  zero % ) .
unfortunately , the test only work for one serotype of l . pneumophila ( type one , the serotype responsible for most infection ) .
consequently , isolation and identification of l . pneumophila from sputum remain the defining test for diagnosis .
once diagnose , legionnaire disease can be effectively treat with fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotic .
however , the disease be sometimes fatal  about one  zero % of patient die of complications . [ one  four ]
there be currently no vaccine available .
link to learning one  four .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
legionella
( legionnaires ' disease and pontiac fever 
diagnosis , treatment , and complications ) .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / legionella / about / diagnosis . html .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
nine  eight  zero chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
why be legionnaires disease associate with air - conditioning system ?

how do legionella pneumophila circumvent the immune system ?
q fever
the zoonotic disease q fever be cause by a rickettsia , coxiella burnetii .
the primary reservoir for this bacterium be domesticate livestock such as cattle , sheep , and goat .
the bacterium may be transmit by tick or through exposure to the urine , fece , milk , or amniotic fluid of an infect animal .
in human , the primary route of infection be through inhalation of contaminate farmyard aerosol .
- pron - be , therefore , largely an occupational disease of farmer .
human be acutely sensitive to c . burnetii - the infective dose be estimate to be just a few cells . [ one  five ]
in addition , the organism be hardy and can survive in a dry environment for an extended time .
symptom associate with acute q fever include high fever , headache , coughing , pneumonia , and general malaise .
in a small number of patient ( less than five %[ one  six ] ) , the condition may become chronic , often lead to endocarditis , which may be fatal .
diagnose rickettsial infection by cultivation in the laboratory be both difficult and hazardous because of the easy aerosolization of the bacteria , so pcr and elisa be commonly use .
doxycycline be the first - line drug to treat acute q fever .
in chronic q fever , doxycycline be often pair with hydroxychloroquine .
bacterial diseases of the respiratory tract
numerous pathogen can cause infection of the respiratory tract .
many of these infection produce similar sign and symptom , but appropriate treatment depend on accurate diagnosis through laboratory testing .
the table in figure two  two  .  one  five and figure two  two  .  one  six summarize the most important bacterial respiratory infection , with the latter focusing specifically on form of bacterial pneumonia .
disease profile one  five .
wd
tigertt et al .
“ airborne q fever .
"
bacteriological reviews two  five
no .
three ( one  nine  six  one  )  two  eight  five – two  nine  three . one  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ q fever .
symptoms , diagnosis , and treatment .
" two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . cdc . gov / qfever / symptom / index . html .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  eight  one figure two  two  .  one  five nine  eight  two chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  one  six chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
nine  eight  three two  two  .  three viral infections of the respiratory tract learning objectives
 identify the most common virus that can cause infection of the upper and low respiratory tract
 compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease of the respiratory tract viruses be the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infection .
unlike the bacterial pathogen , - pron - have few effective therapy to combat viral respiratory infection .
fortunately , many of these disease be mild and selflimite .
a few respiratory infection manifest - pron - primary symptom at other location in the body .
the common cold
the common cold be a generic term for a variety of mild viral infection of the nasal cavity .
more than two  zero  zero different virus be know to cause the common cold .
the most common group of cold virus include rhinovirus , coronaviruse , and adenovirus .
these infection be widely disseminate in the human population and be transmit through direct contact and droplet transmission .
cough and sneeze efficiently produce infectious aerosol , and rhinovirus be know to persist on environmental surface for up to a week . [ one  seven ] viral contact with the nasal mucosa or eye can lead to infection .
rhinovirus tend to replicate good between three  three ° c ( nine  one  .  four ° f ) and three  five ° c ( nine  five ° f ) , somewhat below normal body temperature ( three  seven ° c [ nine  eight  .  six ° f ] ) .
as a consequence , - pron - tend to infect the cooler tissue of the nasal cavity .
cold be mark by an irritation of the mucosa that lead to an inflammatory response .
this produce common sign and symptom such as nasal excess nasal secretion ( runny nose ) , congestion , sore throat , cough , and sneeze .
the absence of high fever be typically use to differentiate common cold from other viral infection , like influenza .
some cold may progress to cause otitis medium , pharyngitis , or laryngitis , and patient may also experience headache and body ache .
the disease , however , be self - limit and typically resolve within one – two week .
there be no effective antiviral treatment for the common cold and antibacterial drug should not be prescribe unless secondary bacterial infection have be establish .
many of the virus that cause cold be relate , so immunity develop throughout life .
give the number of virus that cause cold , however , individual be never likely to develop immunity to all cause of the common cold .

how be cold transmit ?

what be responsible for the symptom of a cold ?
part three
since antibiotic treatment have prove ineffective , john 's doctor suspect that a viral or fungal pathogen may be the culprit behind john 's case of pneumonia .
another possibility be that john could have an antibiotic - resistant bacterial infection that will require a different antibiotic or combination of antibiotic to clear .
the ridt test both come back negative for type a and type b influenza .
however , the diagnostic laboratory identify the sputum isolate as legionella pneumophila .
the doctor order test of john 's urine and , on the clinical focus one  seven .
ag l'huillier et al .
“
survival of rhinoviruses on human fingers .
" clinical microbiology and infection two  one , no .
four
( two  zero  one  five  )  three  eight  one – three  eight  five . nine  eight  four chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five second day after - pron - admission , result of an enzyme immunoassay ( eia ) be positive for the legionella antigen .
john 's doctor add levofloxacin to - pron - antibiotic therapy and continue to monitor - pron - .
the doctor also begin to ask john where - pron - have be over the past one  zero to one  four day .

do negative ridt result absolutely rule out influenza virus as the etiologic agent ?
why or why not ?

what be john 's prognosis ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
influenza commonly know as the flu , influenza be a common viral disease of the low respiratory system cause by an orthomyxovirus .
influenza be pervasive worldwide and cause three  ,  zero  zero  zero – five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death each year in the united states .
the annual mortality rate can vary greatly depend on the virulence of the strain ( s ) responsible for seasonal epidemic .
[ one  eight ] influenza infection be most typically characterize by fever , chill , and body ache .
this be follow by symptom similar to the common cold that may last a week or more .
table two  two  .  two compare the sign and symptom of influenza and the common cold .
compare the common cold and influenza sign / symptom common cold influenza fever low ( three  seven  .  two ° c [ nine  nine ° f ] )
high ( three  nine ° c [ one  zero  two  .  two ° f ] )
headache common common aches and pain mild severe fatigue slight severe nasal congestion common rare sneezing common rare table two  two  .  two
in general , influenza be self - limit .
however , serious case can lead to pneumonia and other complication that can be fatal .
such case be more common in the very young and the elderly  however , certain strain of influenza virus ( like the one  nine  one  eight – one  nine  one  nine variant discuss later in this chapter ) be more lethal to young adult than to the very young or old .
strain that affect young adult be believe to involve a cytokine storm - a positive feedback loop that form between cytokine production and leukocyte .
this cytokine storm produce an acute inflammatory response that lead to rapid fluid accumulation in the lung , culminate in pulmonary failure .
in such case , the ability to mount a vigorous immune response be actually detrimental to the patient .
the very young and very old be less susceptible to this effect because - pron - immune system be less robust .
a complication of influenza that occur primarily in child and teenager be reye syndrome .
this sequela cause swell in the liver and brain , and may progress to neurological damage , coma , or death .
reye syndrome may follow other viral infection , like chickenpox , and have be associate with the use of aspirin .
for this reason , the cdc and other agency recommend that aspirin and product contain aspirin never be use to treat viral illness in child young than age one  nine years . [ one  nine ] one  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
estimate seasonal influenza - associated deaths in the united states  cdc study confirms variability of flu .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / flu / about / disease / us_flu - related_deaths . htm .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  eight  five
the influenza virus be primarily transmit by direct contact and inhalation of aerosol .
the rna genome of this virus exist as seven or eight segment , each coat with ribonucleoprotein and encode one or two specific viral protein .
the influenza virus be surround by a lipid membrane envelope , and two of the main antigen of the influenza virus be the spike protein hemagglutinin ( h ) and neuraminidase ( n ) , as show in figure two  two  .  one  seven .
these spike protein play important role in the viral infectious cycle .
figure two  two  .  one  seven
the illustration show the structure of an influenza virus .
the viral envelope be stud with copy of the protein neuraminidase and hemagglutinin , and surround the individual seven or eight rna genome segment .
( credit  modification of work by dan higgins , centers for disease control and prevention )
follow inhalation , the influenza virus use the hemagglutinin protein to bind to sialic acid receptor on host respiratory epithelial cell .
this facilitate endocytosis of the viral particle .
once inside the host cell , the negative strand viral rna be replicate by the viral rna polymerase to form mrna , which be translate by the host to produce viral protein .
additional viral rna molecule be transcribe to produce viral genomic rna , which assemble with viral protein to form mature virion .
release of the virion from the host cell be facilitate by viral neuraminidase , which cleave sialic - acid receptor to allow progeny virus to make a clean exit when bud from an infected cell .
there be three genetically related influenza virus , call a , b , and c .
the influenza
a virus have different subtype base on the structure of - pron - hemagglutinin and neuraminidase protein .
there be currently one  eight know subtype of hemagglutinin and one  one know subtype of neuraminidase .
influenza virus be serologically characterize by the type of h and n protein that - pron - possess .
of the nearly two  zero  zero different combination of h and n , only a few , such as the h one n one strain , be associate with human disease .
the influenza viruse
a , b , and c make up three of the five major group of orthomyxovirus .
the difference between the three type of influenza be summarize in table two  two  .  three .
the most virulent group be the influenza
a virus , which cause seasonal pandemic of influenza each year .
influenza
a virus can infect a variety of animal , include pig , horse , pig , and even whale and dolphin .
influenza b virus be less virulent and be sometimes associate with epidemic outbreak .
influenza c virus generally produce the mild disease symptom and be rarely connect with epidemic .
neither influenza b virus nor influenza c virus have significant animal reservoir .
the three major groups of influenza
viruses influenza
a virus influenza b virus influenza c virus severity severe moderate mild table two  two  .  three one  nine .
ed belay et al .
“
reye 's syndrome in the united states from one  nine  eight  one through one  nine  nine  seven .
"
new england journal of medicine
three  four  zero
no .
one  eight
( one  nine  nine  nine  )  one  three  seven  seven – one  three  eight  two . nine  eight  six chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the three major groups of influenza
viruses influenza
a virus influenza b virus influenza c virus animal reservoir
yes
no
no
genome segment
eight eight seven population spread epidemic and pandemic epidemic sporadic antigenic variation shift / drift
drift drift table two  two  .  three
influenza virus infection elicit a strong immune response , particularly to the hemagglutinin protein , which would protect the individual if - pron - encounter the same virus .
unfortunately , the antigenic property of the virus change relatively rapidly , so new strain be evolve that immune system previously challenge by influenza virus can not recognize .
when an influenza virus gain a new hemagglutinin or neuraminidase type , - pron - be able to evade the host 's immune response and be successfully transmit , often lead to an epidemic .
there be two mechanism by which these evolutionary change may occur .
the mechanism of antigen drift and antigenic shift for influenza virus have be describe in virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens .
of these two genetic process , - pron - be virus produce by antigenic shift that have the potential to be extremely virulent because individual previously infect by other strain be unlikely to produce any protective immune response against these novel variant .
the most lethal influenza pandemic in record history occur from one  nine  one  eight through one  nine  one  nine .
near the end of world war i , an antigenic shift involve the recombination of avian and human virus be think to have produce a new h one n one virus .
this strain rapidly spread worldwide and be commonly claim to have kill as many as four  zero million to five  zero million people - more than double the number kill in the war .
although refer to as the spanish flu , this disease be think to have originate in the united states .
regardless of - pron - source , the condition of world war i greatly contribute to the spread of this disease .
crowd , poor sanitation , and rapid mobilization of large number of personnel and animal facilitate the dissemination of the new virus once - pron - appear .
several of the most important influenza pandemic of modern time have be associate with antigenic shift .
a few of these be summarize in table two  two  .  four .
historical influenza outbreaks[ two  zero ][ two  one ][ two  two ]
years
common name serotype estimate number of
deaths one  nine  one  eight – one  nine  one  nine spanish flu h one n one
two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero one  nine  five  seven – one  nine  five  eight asian flu n two n two
one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – two  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero
one  nine  six  eight – one  nine  six  nine hong kong flu h three n two one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero – three  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero two  zero  zero  nine – two  zero  one  zero swine flu
h one n one  /  zero  nine one  five  two  ,  zero  zero  zero – five  seven  five  ,  zero  zero  zero table two  two  .  four laboratory diagnosis of influenza be typically perform use a variety of ridt .
these test be inoculate by point - of - care personnel and give result within one  five – two  zero minute .
unfortunately , these test have variable sensitivity and commonly yield false - negative result .
other test include hemagglutination of erythrocyte ( due to hemagglutinin two  zero .
ce mills et al .
“
transmissibility of one  nine  one  eight pandemic influenza .
"
nature four  three  two , no .
seven  zero  one  nine ( two  zero  zero  four  )  nine  zero  four – nine  zero  six .
two  one .
e . tognotti .
“
influenza pandemics 
a historical retrospect .
” journal of infection in develop countries three , no .
five ( two  zero  zero  nine  )  three  three  one – three  three  four .
two  two .
fs dawood et al .
“
estimate global mortality associate with the first one  two month of two  zero  zero  nine pandemic influenza a h one n one virus circulation 
a modelling study .
"
the lancet infectious diseases one  two , no .
nine
( two  zero  one  two  )  six  eight  seven – six  nine  five .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  eight  seven action ) or complement fixation .
patient serum antibodie against influenza virus can also be detect in blood sample .
because influenza be self - limit disease , diagnosis through these more time - consume and expensive method be not typically use .
three drug that inhibit influenza neuraminidase activity be available  inhale zanamivir , oral oseltamivir , and intravenous peramivir .
if take at the onset of symptom , these drug can shorten the course of the disease .
these drug be think to impair the ability of the virus to efficiently exit infected host cell .
a more effective mean of control influenza outbreak , though , be vaccination .
every year , new influenza vaccine be develop to be effective against the strain expect to be predominant .
this be determine in february by a review of the dominant strain around the world from a network of report site  - pron - report be use to generate a recommendation for the vaccine combination for the follow winter in the northern hemisphere .
in september , a similar recommendation be make for the winter in the southern hemisphere . [ two  three ]
these recommendation be use by vaccine manufacturer to formulate each year 's vaccine .
in most case , three or four virus be select - the two most prevalent influenza a strain and one or two influenza b strain .
the choose strain be typically cultivate in egg and use to produce either an inactivated or a live attenuate vaccine ( e . g . , flumist ) .
for individual one  eight year or old with an allergy to egg product , a recombinant egg - free trivalent vaccine be available .
most of the influenza vaccine over the past decade have have an effectiveness of about five  zero % . [ two  four ]
flu pandemic during the spring of two  zero  one  three , a new strain of h seven n nine influenza be report in china .
a total of one  three  two people be infect .
of those infect , four  four ( three  three % ) die .
a genetic analysis of the virus suggest that this strain arise from the reassortment of three different influenza virus  a domestic duck h seven n three virus , a wild bird h seven n nine virus , and a domestic poultry h nine n two virus .
the virus be detect in the chinese domestic bird flock and contact with this reservoir be think to have be the primary source of infection .
this strain of influenza be not able to spread from person to person .
therefore , the disease do not become a global problem .
this case do , though , illustrate the potential threat that influenza still represent .
if a strain like the h seven n nine virus be to undergo another antigenic shift , - pron - could become more communicable in the human population .
with a mortality rate of three  three % , such a pandemic would be disastrous .
for this reason , organization like the world health organization and the centers for disease control and prevention keep all know influenza outbreak under constant surveillance .

compare the severity of the three type of influenza virus .

why must new influenza vaccine be develop each year ?
viral pneumonia viruses cause few case of pneumonia than bacteria  however , several virus can lead to pneumonia in child and the elderly .
the most common source of viral pneumonia be adenovirus , influenza virus , parainfluenza virus , and respiratory syncytial virus .
the sign and symptom produce by these virus can range from mild cold - like case in point two  three .
world health organization .
"
who report on global surveillance of epidemic - prone infectious diseases .
" two  zero  zero  zero .
http / / www . who . int / csr / resource / publication / surveillance / influenza . pdf .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
two  four .
center of disease control and prevention .
“
vaccine effectiveness - how well do the flu vaccine work ?
"
two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / flu / about / qa / vaccineeffect . htm .
accessed july six , two  zero  one  six .
nine  eight  eight chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five symptom to severe case of pneumonia , depend on the virulence of the virus strain and the strength of the host defense of the infect individual .
occasionally , infection can result in otitis medium .
respiratory syncytial virus ( rsv ) infection be fairly common in infant  most people have be infect by the age of two year .
during infection , a viral surface protein cause host cell to fuse and form multinucleate giant cell call syncytia .
there be no specific antiviral therapy or vaccine available for viral pneumonia .
in adult , these infection be self - limit , resemble the common cold , and tend to resolve uneventfully within one or two week .
infection in infant , however , can be life - threaten .
rsv be highly contagious and can be spread through respiratory droplet from cough and sneezing .
rsv can also survive for a long time on environmental surface and , thus , be transmit indirectly via fomite .

who be most likely to contract viral pneumonia ?

what be the recommend treatment for viral pneumonia ?
sars and mers severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) and middle east respiratory syndrome ( mers ) be two acute respiratory infection cause by coronaviruse .
in both case , these be think to be zoonotic infection .
bat and civet cat be think to have be the reservoir for sars  camel seem to be the reservoir for mers .
sars originate in southern china in the winter of two  zero  zero  two and rapidly spread to three  seven country .
within about one year , more than eight  ,  zero  zero  zero people experience influenza - like symptom and nearly eight  zero  zero people die .
the rapid spread and severity of these infection cause grave concern at the time .
however , the outbreak be control in two  zero  zero  three and no further case of sars have be record since two  zero  zero  four  . [ two  five ] sign and symptom of sars include high fever , headache , body ache , and cough , and most patient will develop pneumonia .
mer be first report in saudi arabia in two  zero  one  three .
although some infect individual will be asymptomatic or have mild cold - like symptom , most will develop a high fever , ache , cough and a severe respiratory infection that can progress to pneumonia .
as of two  zero  one  five , over one  ,  three  zero  zero people in two  seven country have be infect .
about five  zero  zero people have die .
there be no specific treatment for either mers or sars .
in addition , no vaccine be currently available .
several recombinant vaccine , however , be be develop .

what be the cause of sars ?

what be the sign and symptom of mers ?
viral respiratory diseases cause skin rash measles , rubella ( german measle ) , and chickenpox be three important viral disease often associate with skin rash .
however , - pron - symptom be systemic , and because - pron - portal of entry be the respiratory tract , - pron - can be consider respiratory infection .
two  five .
y . huang .
"
the sars epidemic and - pron - aftermath in china  a political perspective .
"
in learning from sars  prepare for the next disease outbreak .
edit by s . knobler et al .
washington , dc  national academies press  two  zero  zero  four .
available at 
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / book / nbk nine  two  four  seven  nine  / chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  eight  nine measles ( rubeola )
the measle virus ( mev ) cause the highly contagious disease measle , also know as rubeola , which be a major cause of childhood mortality worldwide .
although vaccination effort have greatly reduce the incidence of measle in much of the world , epidemic be still common in unvaccinated population in certain countries . [ two  six ]
the measle virus be a single - strand , negative - strand rna virus and , like the influenza virus , - pron - possess an envelope with spike of embed hemagglutinin .
the infection be spread by direct contact with infectious secretion or inhalation of airborne droplet spread by breathing , coughing , or sneeze .
measles be initially characterize by a high fever , conjunctivitis , and a sore throat .
the virus then move systemically through the bloodstream and cause a characteristic rash .
the measle rash initially form on the face and later spread to the extremity .
the red , raise macular rash will eventually become confluent and can last for several day .
at the same time , extremely high fever ( high than four  zero  .  six ° c [ one  zero  five ° f ] ) can occur .
another diagnostic sign of measle infection be koplik 's spot , white spot that form on the inner lining of inflamed cheek tissue ( figure two  two  .  one  eight ) .
figure two  two  .  one  eight
( a ) measles typically present as a raise macular rash that begin on the face and spread to the extremity .
( b )
koplik 's spot on the oral mucosa be also characteristic of measle .
( c )
a thin - section transmission electron micrograph of a measle virion .
( credit a , b , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
although measle be usually self - limit , - pron - can lead to pneumonia , encephalitis , and death .
in addition , the inhibition of immune system cell by the measle virus predispose patient to secondary infection .
in severe infection with highly virulent strain , measle fatality rate can be as high as one  zero % to one  five % .
there be more than one  four  five  ,  zero  zero  zero measle death ( mostly young child ) worldwide in two  zero  one  three  . [ two  seven ]
the preliminary diagnosis of measle be typically base on the appearance of the rash and koplik 's spot .
hemagglutination inhibition test and serological test may be use to confirm measle infection in low - prevalence setting .
there be no effective treatment for measle .
vaccination be widespread in develop country as part of the measle , mump , and rubella ( mmr ) vaccine .
as a result , there be typically few than two  zero  zero case of measle in the united states annually . [ two  eight ]
when - pron - be see , - pron - be often associate with child who have not be vaccinate .
two  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
global health - measles , rubella , and crs , eliminating measles , rubella and congenital rubella syndrome ( crs
) worldwide .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / globalhealth / measles / . accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
two  seven .
world health organization .
“ measles factsheet .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs two  eight  six  / en / . accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
two  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
measles cases and outbreaks .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / measles / cases - outbreaks . html .
accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
nine  nine  zero chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five preventable measles outbreaks
in december two  zero  one  four , a measle epidemic begin at disneyland in southern california .
within just four month , this outbreak affect one  three  four people in two  four states . [ two  nine ] characterization of the virus suggest that an unidentified infect individual bring the disease to the united states from the philippines , where a similar virus have sicken more than five  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero people and kill one  one  zero  . [ three  zero ]
measles be highly communicable , and - pron - spread at disneyland may have be facilitate by the low vaccination rate in some community in california . [ three  one ]
several factor could conceivably lead to a strong comeback of measle in the u . s . measles be still an epidemic disease in many location worldwide .
air travel enable infect individual to rapidly translocate these infection globally .
compound this problem , low vaccination rate in some local area in the united states ( such as in amish community ) provide population of susceptible host for the virus to establish - pron - .
finally , measle have be a low - prevalence infection in the u . s . for some time .
as a consequence , physician be not as likely to recognize the initial symptom and make accurate diagnosis .
until vaccination rate become high enough to ensure herd immunity , measle be likely to be an ongoing problem in the united states .
rubella ( german measles ) rubella , or the german measle , be a relatively mild viral disease that produce a rash somewhat like that cause by the measle , even though the two disease be unrelated .
the rubella virus be an enveloped rna virus that can be find in the respiratory tract .
- pron - be transmit from person to person in aerosol produce by cough or sneeze .
nearly half of all infect people remain asymptomatic .
however , the virus be shed and spread by asymptomatic carrier .
like rubeola , rubella begin with a facial rash that spread to the extremity ( figure two  two  .  one  nine ) .
however , the rash be less intense , shorter live ( two – three day ) , not associate with koplik 's spot , and the result fever be low ( one  zero  one ° f [ three  eight  .  three ° c ] ) .
congenital rubella syndrome be the most severe clinical complication of the german measle .
this occur if a woman be infect with rubella during pregnancy .
the rubella virus be teratogenic , mean - pron - can cause developmental defect if - pron - cross the placenta during pregnancy .
there be a very high incidence of stillbirth , spontaneous abortion , or congenital birth defect if the mother be infect before one  one week of pregnancy and three  five % if - pron - be infect between week one  three – one  six  after this time the incidence be low . [ three  two ]
for this reason , prenatal screening for rubella be commonly practice in the united states .
postnatal infection be usually self - limit and rarely cause severe complication .
like measle , the preliminary diagnosis of rubella be base on the patient 's history , vaccination record , and the appearance of the rash .
the diagnosis can be confirm by hemagglutinin inhibition assay and a variety of other immunological technique .
there be no antiviral therapy for rubella , but an effective vaccine ( mmr ) be widely available .
vaccination effort have essentially eliminate rubella in the united states  few than a dozen case be report in a typical year .
micro connections two  nine .
ibid .
three  zero .
world health organization .
" measles - rubella bulletin .
"
manila , philippines  expand programme on immunization regional office for the western pacific world health organization  nine no . one ( two  zero  one  five ) .
http / / www . wpro . who . int / immunization / documents /
mrbulletinvol nine issue one  . pdf three  one .
m . bloch et al .
“ vaccination rates for every kindergartener in california .
"
the new york times february six , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . nytimes . com / interactive /  two  zero  one  five  /  zero  two  /  zero  six  / us / california - measles - vaccines - map . html ? _r= one .
accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
three  two .
e . miller et al .
“
consequences of confirmed maternal rubella at successive stages of pregnancy .
"
the lancet three  two  zero , no . eight  three  zero  two
( one  nine  eight  two  )  seven  eight  one – seven  eight  four .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  nine  one figure two  two  .  one  nine ( a )
this photograph show the appearance of the german measle ( rubella ) rash .
note that this be less intense than the rash of measle and the lesion be not confluent .
( b )
this transmission electron micrograph show rubella virus virion just bud from a host cell .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chickenpox and shingles chickenpox , also know as varicella , be once a common viral childhood disease .
the causative agent of chickenpox , the varicella - zoster virus , be a member of the herpesvirus family .
in child , the disease be mild and selflimite , and be easily transmit by direct contact or inhalation of material from the skin lesion .
in adult , however , chickenpox infection can be much more severe and can lead to pneumonia and birth defect in the case of infect pregnant woman .
reye syndrome , mention earlier in this chapter , be also a serious complication associate with chickenpox , generally in child .
once infect , most individual acquire a lifetime immunity to future chickenpox outbreak .
for this reason , parent once hold “ chickenpox party " for - pron - child .
at these event , uninfected child be intentionally expose to an infected individual so - pron - would contract the disease earlier in life , when the incidence of complication be very low , rather than risk a more severe infection later .
after the initial viral exposure , chickenpox have an incubation period of about two week .
the initial infection of the respiratory tract lead to viremia and eventually produce fever and chill .
a pustular rash then develop on the face , progress to the trunk , and then the extremity , although most form on the trunk ( figure two  two  .  two  zero ) .
eventually , the lesion burst and form a crusty scab .
individual with chickenpox be infectious from about two day before the outbreak of the rash until all the lesion have scabbe over .
nine  nine  two chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  two  .  two  zero ( a )
the characteristic appearance of the pustular chickenpox rash be concentrate on the trunk region .
( b )
this transmission electron micrograph show a viroid of human herpesvirus three , the virus that cause chickenpox in child and shingle when - pron - be reactivate in adult .
( credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
like other herpesviruse , the varicella - zoster virus can become dormant in nerve cell .
while the pustular vesicle be develop , the virus move along sensory nerve to the dorsal ganglia in the spinal cord .
once there , the varicella - zoster virus can remain latent for decade .
these dormant virus may be reactivate later in life by a variety of stimuli , include stress , aging , and immunosuppression .
once reactivate , the virus move along sensory nerve to the skin of the face or trunk .
this result in the production of the painful lesion in a condition know as shingle ( figure two  two  .  two  one ) .
these symptom generally last for two – six week , and may recur more than once .
postherpetic neuralgia , pain signal send from damage nerve long after the other symptom have subside , be also possible .
in addition , the virus can spread to other organ in immunocompromised individual .
a person with shingles lesion can transmit the virus to a nonimmune contact , and the newly infect individual would develop chickenpox as the primary infection .
shingle can not be transmit from one person to another .
the primary diagnosis of chickenpox in child be mainly base on the presentation of a pustular rash of the trunk .
serological and pcr - base test be available to confirm the initial diagnosis .
treatment for chickenpox infection in child be usually not require .
in patient with shingle , acyclovir treatment can often reduce the severity and length of symptom , and diminish the risk of postherpetic neuralgia .
an effective vaccine be now available for chickenpox .
a vaccine be also available for adult old than six  zero year who be infect with chickenpox in - pron - youth .
this vaccine reduce the likelihood of a shingles outbreak by boost the immune defense that be keep the latent infection in check and prevent reactivation .
chapter two  two

respiratory system infections nine  nine  three figure two  two  .  two  one
( a )
an individual suffering from shingle .
( b )
the rash be form because of the reactivation of a varicella - zoster infection that be initially contract in childhood .
( credit a  modification of work by national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid )  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

why do measle often lead to secondary infection ?

what sign or symptom would distinguish rubella and measle ?

why can chickenpox lead to shingle later in life ?
smallpox stockpiles smallpox have probably kill more human than any other infectious disease , with the possible exception of tuberculosis .
this disease , cause by the variola major virus , be transmit by inhalation of viral particle shed from lesion in the throat .
the smallpox virus spread systemically in the bloodstream and produce a pustular skin rash .
historical epidemic of smallpox have fatality rate of five  zero % or great in susceptible population .
concerted worldwide vaccination effort eradicate smallpox from the general population in one  nine  seven  seven .
this be the first microbial disease in history to be eradicate , a feat make possible by the fact that the only reservoir for the smallpox virus be infect human .
although the virus be no longer present in the wild , laboratory sample of the virus still exist in the united states and russia . [ three  three ]
the question be , why do these sample still exist ?
some claim that these stock should be maintain for research purpose .
should the smallpox virus ever reappear , - pron - say , - pron - would need access to such stock for development of vaccine and treatment .
concern about a re - emergence of the virus be not totally unfounded .
although there be no live reservoir of the virus , there be always the possibility that smallpox could re - emerge from mummified human body or human remain preserve in permafrost .
- pron - be also possible that there be as - yet undiscovered sample of the virus in other location around the world .
eye on
ethics nine  nine  four chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
an example of such " lost " sample be discover in a drawer in a food and drug administration lab in maryland . [ three  four ]
if an outbreak from such a source be to occur , - pron - could lead to uncontrolled epidemic , since the population be largely unvaccinated now .
critic of this argument , include many research scientist and the world health organization , claim that there be no longer any rational argument for keep the sample .
- pron - view the " re - emergence scenario " as a thinly veil pretense for harbor biological weapon .
these scenario , - pron - say , be less probable than an intentional reintroduction of the virus from militarized stock by human .
furthermore , - pron - point out that if - pron - need to research smallpox in the future , - pron - could rebuild the virus from - pron - dna sequence .
what do - pron - think ?
be there legitimate argument for maintain stockpile of smallpox , or should all form of this deadly disease be eradicate ?
viral infections of the respiratory tract
many virus be capable of enter and cause disease in the respiratory system , and a number be able to spread beyond the respiratory system to cause systemic infection .
most of these infection be highly contagious and , with a few exception , antimicrobial drug be not effective for treatment .
although some of these infection be self - limit , other can have serious or fatal complication .
effective vaccine have be develop for several of these disease , as summarize in figure two  two  .  two  two .
disease profile three  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ cdc medium statement on newly discovered smallpox specimens .
"
july eight , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . cdc . gov / media / releases /  two  zero  one  four  / s zero  seven  zero  eight  - nih . html .
access on july seven , two  zero  one  six .
three  four .
ibid .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  nine  five figure two  two  .  two  two nine  nine  six chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  two  .  four respiratory mycoses learning objectives
 identify the most common fungi that can cause infection of the respiratory tract
 compare the major characteristic of specific fungal disease of the respiratory tract fungal pathogen be ubiquitous in the environment .
serological study have demonstrate that most people have be expose to fungal respiratory pathogen during - pron - life .
yet symptomatic infection by these microbe be rare in healthy individual .
this demonstrate the efficacy of the defense of - pron - respiratory system .
in this section , - pron - will examine some of the fungi that can cause respiratory infection .
histoplasmosis histoplasmosis be a fungal disease of the respiratory system and most commonly occur in the mississippi valley of the united states and in part of central and south america , africa , asia , and australia .
the causative agent , histoplasma capsulatum , be a dimorphic fungus .
this microbe grow as a filamentous mold in the environment but occur as a budding yeast during human infection .
the primary reservoir for this pathogen be soil , particularly in location rich in bat or bird fece .
histoplasmosis be acquire by inhale microconidial spore in the air  this disease be not transmit from human to human .
the incidence of histoplasmosis exposure be high in endemic area , with six  zero %– nine  zero % of the population have anti - histoplasma antibody , depend on location [ three  five ] however , relatively few individual expose to the fungus actually experience symptom .
those most likely to be affect be the very young , the elderly , and immunocompromise people .
in many way , the course of this disease be similar to that of tuberculosis .
follow inhalation , the spore enter the lung and be phagocytize by alveolar macrophage .
the fungal cell then survive and multiply within these phagocyte ( see figure five  .  two  six ) .
focal infection cause the formation of granulomatous lesion , which can lead to calcification that resemble the ghon complex of tuberculosis , even in asymptomatic case .
also like tuberculosis , histoplasmosis can become chronic and reactivation can occur , along with dissemination to other area of the body ( e . g . , the liver or spleen ) .
sign and symptom of pulmonary histoplasmosis include fever , headache , and weakness with some chest discomfort .
the initial diagnosis be often base on chest radiograph and culture grow on fungal selective medium like sabouraud ' s dextrose agar .
direct fluorescence antibody staining and giemsa staining can also be use to detect this pathogen .
in addition , serological test include a complement fixation assay and histoplasmin sensitivity can be use to confirm the diagnosis .
in most case , these infection be self - limit and antifungal therapy be not require .
however , in disseminated disease , the antifungal agent amphotericin b and ketoconazole be effective  itraconazole may be effective in immunocompromised patient , in whom the disease can be more serious .

in what environment be one more likely to be infect with histoplasmosis ?

identify at least two similarity between histoplasmosis and tuberculosis .
coccidioidomycosis infection by the dimorphic fungus coccidioides immitis cause coccidioidomycosis .
because the microbe be endemic to the san joaquin valley of california , the disease be sometimes refer to as valley fever .
a relate species that three  five .
ne manos et al .
“
geographic variation in the prevalence of histoplasmin sensitivity .
”
dis chest two  nine , no .
six
( one  nine  five  six  )  six  four  nine – six  six  eight .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system infections nine  nine  seven cause similar infection be find in semi - arid and arid region of the southwestern united states , mexico , and central and south america . [ three  six ]
like histoplasmosis , coccidioidomycosis be acquire by inhale fungal spore - in this case , arthrospore form by hyphal fragmentation .
once in the body , the fungus differentiate into spherule that be fill with endospore .
most c . immitis infection be asymptomatic and self - limit .
however , the infection can be very serious for immunocompromised patient .
the endospore may be transport in the blood , disseminate the infection and lead to the formation of granulomatous lesion on the face and nose ( figure two  two  .  two  three ) .
in severe case , other major organ can become infected , lead to serious complication such as fatal meningitis .
coccidioidomycosis can be diagnose by culture clinical sample .
c . immitis readily grow on laboratory fungal medium , such as sabouraud ' s dextrose agar , at three  five ° c ( nine  five ° f ) .
culture the fungus , however , be rather dangerous .
c . immitis be one of the most infectious fungal pathogen know and be capable of cause laboratory - acquire infection .
indeed , until two  zero  one  two , this organism be consider a " select agent " of bioterrorism and classify as a bsl -  three microbe .
serological test for antibody production be more often use for diagnosis .
although mild case generally do not require intervention , disseminated infection can be treat with intravenous antifungal drug like amphotericin b . figure two  two  .  two  three ( a )
this patient have extensive facial lesion due to a disseminated coccidioides infection .
( b )
this fluorescent micrograph depict a spherule of c . immitis contain endospore .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
resolution john 's negative ridt test do not rule out influenza , since false - negative result be common , but the legionella infection still must be treat with antibiotic therapy and be the more serious condition .
john ' s prognosis be good , provide the physician can find an antibiotic therapy to which the infection respond .
while john be undergo treatment , three of the employee from the home improvement store also report to the clinic with very similar symptom .
all three be old than five  five year and have legionella antigen in - pron - urine  l . pneumophila be also isolate from - pron - sputum .
a team from the health department be send to the home improvement store to identify a probable source for these infection .
- pron - investigation reveal that about three week earlier , the store ' s air conditioning system , which be locate where the employee eat lunch , clinical focus three  six .
dr hospenthal .
“
coccioidomycosis .
"
medscape . two  zero  one  five .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article /  two  one  five  nine  seven  eight  - overview .
accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
nine  nine  eight chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five have be undergo maintenance .
l . pneumophila be isolate from the cool coil of the air conditioning system and intracellular l . pneumophila be observe in amoebae in sample of condensed water from the cool coil as well ( figure two  two  .  two  four ) .
the amoebae provide protection for the legionella bacteria and be know to enhance - pron - pathogenicity . [ three  seven ]
in the wake of the infection , the store order a comprehensive cleaning of the air conditioning system and implement a regular maintenance program to prevent the growth of biofilm within the cool tower .
- pron - also review practice at - pron - other facility .
after a month of rest at home , john recover from - pron - infection enough to return to work , as do the other three employee of the store .
however , john experience lethargy and joint pain for more than a year after - pron - treatment .
figure two  two  .  two  four
legionella pneumophila ( red intracellular rod ) infect amoebae from a contaminated water sample .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) go back to the previous clinical focus box .
blastomycosis blastomycosis be a rare disease cause by another dimorphic fungus , blastomyce dermatitidis .
like histoplasma and coccidioides , blastomyces use the soil as a reservoir , and fungal spore can be inhale from disturbed soil .
the pulmonary form of blastomycosis generally cause mild flu - like symptom and be self - limit .
- pron - can , however , become disseminate in immunocompromised people , lead to chronic cutaneous disease with subcutaneous lesion on the face and hand ( figure two  two  .  two  five ) .
these skin lesion eventually become crusty and discolored and can result in deform scar .
systemic blastomycosis be rare , but if leave untreated , - pron - be always fatal .
preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary blastomycosis can be make by observe the characteristic budding yeast form in sputum sample .
commercially available urine antigen test be now also available .
additional confirmatory test include serological assay such as immunodiffusion test or eia .
most case of blastomycosis respond well to amphotericin b or ketoconazole treatment .
three  seven .
hy lau and nj ashbolt .
"
the role of biofilms and protozoa in legionella pathogenesis  implication for drinking water .
"
journal of applied microbiology one  zero  seven
no .
two
( two  zero  zero  nine  )  three  six  eight – three  seven  eight .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system
infections nine  nine  nine figure two  two  .  two  five ( a )
these skin lesion be the result of disseminated cutaneous blastomycosis .
( b )
a differential interference contrast micrograph of b . dermatitidis yeast culture on blood agar .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) watch this profile ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two blastlunginf ) of a blastomycosis lung infection .
mucormycosis a variety of fungi in the order mucorales cause mucormycosis , a rare fungal disease .
these include bread mold , like rhizopus and mucor  the most commonly associate specie be rhizopus arrhizus ( oryzae ) ( see figure five  .  two  eight ) .
these fungi can colonize many different tissue in immunocompromised patient , but often infect the skin , sinus , or the lung .
although most people be regularly expose to the causative agent of mucormycosis , infection in healthy individual be rare .
exposure to spore from the environment typically occur through inhalation , but the spore can also infect the skin through a wound or the gastrointestinal tract if ingest .
respiratory mucormycosis primarily affect immunocompromised individual , such as patient with cancer or those who have have a transplant . [ three  eight ]
after the spore be inhale , the fungi grow by extend hypha into the host 's tissue .
infection can occur in both the upper and low respiratory tract .
rhinocerebral mucormycosis be an infection of the sinus and brain  symptom include headache , fever , facial swelling , congestion , and tissue necrosis cause black lesion in the oral cavity .
pulmonary mucormycosis be an infection of the lung  symptom include fever , cough , chest pain , and shortness of link to learning three  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
" fungal diseases .
definition of mucormycosis .
” two  zero  one  five http / / www . cdc . gov / fungal / diseases / mucormycosis / definition . html .
accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
one  zero  zero  zero chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five breath .
in severe case , infection may become disseminated and involve the central nervous system , lead to coma and death . [ three  nine ]
diagnose mucormycosis can be challenging .
currently , there be no serological or pcr - base test available to identify these infection .
tissue biopsy specimen must be examine for the presence of the fungal pathogen .
the causative agent , however , be often difficult to distinguish from other filamentous fungi .
infection be typically treat by the intravenous administration of amphotericin b , and superficial infection be remove by surgical debridement .
since the patient be often immunocompromised , viral and bacterial secondary infection commonly develop .
mortality rate vary depend on the site of the infection , the causative fungus , and other factor , but a recent study find an overall mortality rate of five  four % . [ four  zero ]  compare the mode of transmission for coccidioidomycosis , blastomycosis , and mucormycosis .

in general , which be more serious  the pulmonary or disseminated form of these infection ?
aspergillosis aspergillus be a common filamentous fungus find in soil and organic debris .
nearly everyone have be expose to this mold , yet very few people become sick .
in immunocompromised patient , however , aspergillus may become establish and cause aspergillosis .
inhalation of spore can lead to asthma - like allergic reaction .
the symptom commonly include shortness of breath , wheeze , cough , runny nose , and headache .
fungal ball , or aspergilloma , can form when hyphal colony collect in the lung ( figure two  two  .  two  six ) .
the fungal hypha can invade the host tissue , lead to pulmonary hemorrhage and a bloody cough .
in severe case , the disease may progress to a disseminate form that be often fatal .
death most often result from pneumonia or brain hemorrhage .
laboratory diagnosis typically require chest radiograph and a microscopic examination of tissue and respiratory fluid sample .
serological test be available to identify aspergillus antigen .
in addition , a skin test can be perform to determine if the patient have be expose to the fungus .
this test be similar to the mantoux tuberculin skin test use for tuberculosis .
aspergillosis be treat with intravenous antifungal agent , include itraconazole and voriconazole .
allergic symptom can be manage with corticosteroid because these drug suppress the immune system and reduce inflammation .
however , in disseminated infection , corticosteroid must be discontinue to allow a protective immune response to occur .
three  nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
" fungal diseases .
symptom of mucormycosis .
” two  zero  one  five http / / www . cdc . gov / fungal / diseases /
mucormycosis / symptoms . html .
accessed july seven , two  zero  one  six .
four  zero .
mm
roden et al .
“
epidemiology and outcome of zygomycosis 
a review of nine  two  nine report cases .
"
clinical infectious diseases four  one
no .
five
( two  zero  zero  five  )  six  three  four – six  five  three .
chapter two  two
 respiratory system infections one  zero  zero  one figure two  two  .  two  six
a fungal ball can be observe in the upper lobe of the right lung in this chest radiograph of a patient with aspergilloma .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
pneumocystis pneumonia
a type of pneumonia call pneumocystis pneumonia ( pcp ) be cause by pneumocystis jirovecii .
once think to be a protozoan , this organism be formerly name p . carinii but - pron - have be reclassify as a fungus and rename base on biochemical and genetic analysis .
pneumocystis be a lead cause of pneumonia in patient with acquire immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) and can be see in other compromise patient and premature infant .
respiratory infection lead to fever , cough , and shortness of breath .
diagnosis of these infection can be difficult .
the organism be typically identify by microscopic examination of tissue and fluid sample from the lung ( figure two  two  .  two  seven ) .
a pcr - base test be available to detect p . jirovecii in asymptomatic patient with aids .
the good treatment for these infection be the combination drug trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole ( tmp / smz ) .
these sulfa drug often have adverse effect , but the benefit outweigh these risk .
leave untreated , pcp infection be often fatal .
figure two  two  .  two  seven
a light micrograph of a smear contain pneumocystis jirovecii ( dark purple cell ) obtain from human lung tissue and stain with toluidine blue .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
cryptococcosis infection by the encapsulate yeast cryptococcus neoforman cause cryptococcosis .
this fungus be ubiquitous in the one  zero  zero  two chapter two  two  respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five soil and can be isolate from bird fece .
immunocompromise people be infect by inhale basidiospore find in aerosol .
the thick polysaccharide capsule surround these microbe enable - pron - to avoid clearance by the alveolar macrophage .
initial symptom of infection include fever , fatigue , and a dry cough .
in immunocompromised patient , pulmonary infection often disseminate to the brain .
the result meningitis produce headache , sensitivity to light , and confusion .
leave untreated , such infection be often fatal .
cryptococcus infection be often diagnose base on microscopic examination of lung tissue or cerebrospinal fluid .
india ink preparation ( figure two  two  .  two  eight ) can be use to visualize the extensive capsule that surround the yeast cell .
serological test be also available to confirm the diagnosis .
amphotericin b , in combination with flucytosine , be typically use for the initial treatment of pulmonary infection .
amphotericin b be a broad - spectrum antifungal drug that target fungal cell membrane .
- pron - can also adversely impact host cell and produce side effect .
for this reason , clinician must carefully balance the risk and benefit of treatment in these patient .
because - pron - be difficult to eradicate cryptococcal infection , patient usually need to take fluconazole for up to six month after treatment with amphotericin b and flucytosine to clear the fungus .
cryptococcal infection be more common in immunocompromised people , such as those with aids .
these patient typically require life - long suppressive therapy to control this fungal infection .
figure two  two  .  two  eight
( a )
the micrograph show stain bud cryptococcus yeast cell from the lung of a patient with aids .
( b )
the large capsule of cryptococcus neoforman be visible in this negative stain micrograph .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

what population be most at risk for develop pneumocystis pneumonia or cryptococcosis ?

why be these infection fatal if leave untreated ?
fungal diseases of the respiratory tract
most respiratory mycose be cause by fungi that inhabit the environment .
such infection be generally transmit via inhalation of fungal spore and can not be transmit between human .
in addition , healthy people be generally not susceptible to infection even when expose  the fungi be only virulent enough to establish infection in patient with hiv , aids , or another condition that compromise the immune defense .
disease profile chapter two  two
 respiratory system infections one  zero  zero  three figure two  two  .  two  nine summarize the feature of important respiratory mycose .
figure two  two  .  two  nine summary two  two  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the respiratory tract

the respiratory tract be divide into upper and low region at the epiglottis .
one  zero  zero  four chapter two  two

respiratory system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 air enter the upper respiratory tract through the nasal cavity and mouth , which both lead to the pharynx .
the low respiratory tract extend from the larynx into the trachea before branch into the bronchi , which divide further to form the bronchiole , which terminate in alveoli , where gas exchange occur .

the upper respiratory tract be colonize by an extensive and diverse normal microbiota , many of which be potential pathogen .
few microbial inhabitant have be find in the low respiratory tract , and these may be transient .

member of the normal microbiota may cause opportunistic infection , use a variety of strategy to overcome the innate nonspecific defense ( include the mucociliary escalator ) and adaptive specific defense of the respiratory system .
 effective vaccine be available for many common respiratory pathogen , both bacterial and viral .

most respiratory infection result in inflammation of the infect tissue  these condition be give name end in - itis , such as rhinitis , sinusitis , otitis , pharyngitis , and bronchitis .
two  two  .  two bacterial infections of the respiratory tract

a wide variety of bacteria can cause respiratory disease  most be treatable with antibiotic or preventable with vaccine .

streptococcus pyogene cause strep throat , an infection of the pharynx that also cause high fever and can lead to scarlet fever , acute rheumatic fever , and acute glomerulonephritis .

acute otitis medium be an infection of the middle ear that may be cause by several bacteria , include streptococcus pneumoniae , haemophilus influenzae , and moraxella catarrhalis .
the infection can block the eustachian tube , lead to otitis medium with effusion .
 diphtheria , cause by corynebacterium diphtheriae , be now a rare disease because of widespread vaccination .
the bacteria produce exotoxin that kill cell in the pharynx , lead to the formation of a pseudomembrane  and damage other part of the body .

bacterial pneumonia result from infection that cause inflammation and fluid accumulation in the alveoli .
- pron - be most commonly cause by s . pneumoniae or h . influenzae .
the former be commonly multidrug resistant .

mycoplasma pneumonia result from infection by mycoplasma pneumoniae  - pron - can spread quickly , but the disease be mild and self - limit .

chlamydial pneumonia can be cause by three pathogen that be obligate intracellular parasite .
chlamydophila pneumoniae be typically transmit from an infect person , whereas c . psittaci be typically transmit from an infected bird .
chlamydia trachomatis , may cause pneumonia in infant .

several other bacteria can cause pneumonia in immunocompromised individual and those with cystic fibrosis .

tuberculosis be cause by mycobacterium tuberculosis .
infection lead to the production of protective tubercle in the alveoli and calcify ghon complex that can harbor the bacteria for a long time .
antibioticresistant form be common and treatment be typically long term .

pertussis be cause by bordetella pertussis .
mucus accumulation in the lung lead to prolong severe coughing episode ( whooping cough ) that facilitate transmission .
despite an available vaccine , outbreak be still common .

legionnaires disease be cause by infection from environmental reservoir of the legionella pneumophila bacterium .
the bacterium be endocytic within macrophage and infection can lead to pneumonia , particularly among immunocompromised individual .
 q fever be cause by coxiella burnetii , whose primary host be domesticate mammal ( zoonotic disease ) .
- pron - cause pneumonia primarily in farm worker and can lead to serious complication , such as endocarditis .
two  two  .  three viral infections of the respiratory tract

viruses cause respiratory tract infection more frequently than bacteria , and most viral infection lead to mild symptom .

the common cold can be cause by more than two  zero  zero virus , typically rhinoviruse , coronaviruse , and chapter two  two
 respiratory system infections one  zero  zero  five adenovirus , transmit by direct contact , aerosol , or environmental surface .

due to - pron - ability to rapidly mutate through antigenic drift and antigenic shift , influenza remain an important threat to human health .
two new influenza vaccine be develop annually .
 several viral infection , include respiratory syncytial virus infection , which frequently occur in the very young , can begin with mild symptom before progress to viral pneumonia .
 sars and mer be acute respiratory infection cause by coronaviruse , and both appear to originate in animal .
sars have not be see in the human population since two  zero  zero  four but have a high mortality rate during - pron - outbreak .
mer also have a high mortality rate and continue to appear in human population .

measles , rubella , and chickenpox be highly contagious , systemic infection that gain entry through the respiratory system and cause rash and fever .
vaccine be available for all three .
measles be the most severe of the three and be responsible for significant mortality around the world .
chickenpox typically cause mild infection in child but the virus can reactivate to cause painful case of shingle later in life .
two  two  .  four respiratory mycoses 
fungal pathogen rarely cause respiratory disease in healthy individual , but inhalation of fungal spore can cause severe pneumonia and systemic infection in immunocompromised patient .
 antifungal drug like amphotericin b can control most fungal respiratory infection .

histoplasmosis be cause by a mold that grow in soil rich in bird or bat dropping .
few expose individual become sick , but vulnerable individual be susceptible .
the yeast - like infectious cell grow inside phagocyte .

coccidioidomycosis be also acquire from soil and , in some individual , will cause lesion on the face .
extreme case may infect other organ , cause death .

blastomycosis , a rare disease cause by a soil fungus , typically produce a mild lung infection but can become disseminated in the immunocompromised .
systemic case be fatal if untreated .

mucormycosis be a rare disease , cause by fungi of the order mucorales .
- pron - primarily affect immunocompromised people .
infection involve growth of the hypha into infected tissue and can lead to death in some case .

aspergillosis , cause by the common soil fungus aspergillus , infect immunocompromised people .
hyphal ball may impede lung function and hyphal growth into tissue can cause damage .
disseminate form can lead to death .

pneumocystis pneumonia be cause by the fungus p . jirovecii .
the disease be find in patient with aids and other immunocompromised individual .
sulfa drug treatment have side effect , but untreated case may be fatal .

cryptococcosis be cause by cryptococcus neoforman .
lung infection may move to the brain , cause meningitis , which can be fatal .
chapter two  three urogenital system infections figure two  three  .  one many pathogen that cause infection of the urogenital system can be detect in urine sample ( left ) .
the top sample in the culture ( right ) be prepare from the urine of a patient with a urinary tract infection .
( credit b  modification of work by nathan reading )
chapter outline
two  three  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the urogenital tract two  three  .  two bacterial infections of the urinary system two  three  .  three bacterial infections of the reproductive system two  three  .  four viral infections of the reproductive system two  three  .  five fungal infections of the reproductive system two  three  .  six protozoan infections of the urogenital system introduction
the urogenital system be a combination of the urinary tract and reproductive system .
because both system be open to the external environment , - pron - be prone to infection .
some infection be introduce from outside , whereas other result from imbalance in the microbiota of the urogenital tract .
urinary tract infection ( uti ) be one the most common bacterial infection worldwide , affect over one  zero  zero million people each year .
during two  zero  zero  seven in the united states , doctor office visit for uti exceed one  zero million , and an additional two – three million emergency department visit be attribute to uti .
sexually transmitted infection ( sti ) also primarily affect the urogenital system and be an important cause of patient morbidity .
the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimate that there be approximately two  zero million new case of reportable sti annually in the united states , half of which occur in people age one  five – two  four year old .
when sti spread to the reproductive organ , - pron - can be associate with severe morbidity and loss of fertility .
because male and female have different urogenital anatomy , urogenital infection may affect male and female differently .
in this chapter , - pron - will discuss the various microbe that cause urogenital disease and the factor that contribute to - pron - pathogenicity .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  one  one
two  three  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the urogenital tract learning objectives

compare the anatomy , function , and normal microbiota associate with the male and female urogenital system

explain how microorganism , in general , overcome the defense of the urogenital system to cause infection  name , describe , and differentiate between general sign and symptom associate with infection of the urogenital tract
the urinary system filter blood , excrete waste , and maintain an appropriate electrolyte and water balance .
the reproductive system be responsible for the production of gamete and participate in conception and , in female , development of offspring .
due to - pron - proximity and overlap , these system be often study together and refer to as the urogenital system ( or genitourinary system ) .
anatomy of the urinary tract
the basic structure of the urinary tract be common in male and female .
however , there be unique location for these structure in female and male , and there be a significant amount of overlap between the urinary and genital structure in male .
figure two  three  .  two illustrate the urinary anatomy common to female and male .
the kidney carry out the urinary system 's primary function of filter the blood and maintain water and electrolyte balance .
the kidney be compose of million of filtration unit call nephron .
each nephron be in intimate contact with blood through a specialized capillary bed call the glomerulus ( plural glomeruli ) .
fluid , electrolyte , and molecule from the blood pass from the glomerulus into the nephron , create the filtrate that become urine ( figure two  three  .  three ) .
urine that collect in each kidney empty through a ureter and drain to the urinary bladder , which store urine .
urine be release from the bladder to the urethra , which transport - pron - to be excrete from the body through the urinary meatus , the opening of the urethra .
part one nadia be a newly married two  six  - year - old graduate student in economic .
recently - pron - have be experience an unusual vaginal discharge , as well as some itching and discomfort .
since - pron - be due for - pron - annual physical exam , - pron - make an appointment with - pron - doctor hop that - pron - symptom can be quickly treat .
however , - pron - worry that - pron - may have some sort of sexually transmit infection ( sti ) .
although - pron - be now in a monogamous relationship , - pron - be not fully certain of - pron - spouse 's sexual history and - pron - be reluctant to ask - pron - about - pron - .
at - pron - checkup , nadia describe - pron - symptom to - pron - primary care physician and , somewhat awkwardly , explain why - pron - think - pron - may have an sti .
nadia 's doctor reassure - pron - that - pron - regularly see patient with similar concern and encourage - pron - to be fully transparent about - pron - symptom because some sti can have serious complication if leave untreated .
after some further questioning , the doctor take sample of nadia 's blood , urine , and vaginal discharge to be send to the lab for testing .

what be some possible cause of nadia 's symptom ?

why do the doctor take so many different sample ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  zero  one  two
chapter two  three 
urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  two
these structure of the human urinary system be present in both male and female .
figure two  three  .  three
the kidney contain several lobe , each of which contain million of nephron .
the nephron be the functional unit of the kidney , filter the blood and remove water and dissolved compound .
the filtrate first enter the glomerulus and then enter the proximal convoluted tubule .
as - pron - pass through the tubule , the filtrate be further modify by osmosis and active transport until - pron - reach the large duct as urine .
anatomy of the reproductive system
the male reproductive system ( figure two  three  .  four ) be locate in close proximity to the urinary system , and the urethra be part of both system .
the testis be responsible for the production of sperm .
the epididymis be a coiled tube that collect sperm from the testis and pass - pron - on to the vas deferen .
the epididymis be also the site of sperm maturation after - pron - leave the testis .
the seminal vesicle and prostate be accessory gland that produce fluid that support sperm .
during ejaculation , the vas deferen release this mixture of fluid and sperm , call seman , into the urethra , which extend to the end of the penis .
the female reproductive system be locate near the urinary system ( figure two  three  .  four ) .
the external genitalia ( vulva ) in female open to the vagina , a muscular passageway that connect to the cervix .
the cervix be the low part of chapter two  three

urogenital system infection one  zero  one  three
the uterus ( the organ where a fertilize egg will implant and develop ) .
the cervix be a common site of infection , especially for virus that may lead to cervical cancer .
the uterus lead to the fallopian tube and eventually to the ovary .
ovary be the site of ova ( egg ) production , as well as the site of estrogen and progesterone production that be involve in maturation and maintenance of reproductive organ , preparation of the uterus for pregnancy , and regulation of the menstrual cycle .
figure two  three  .  four
the female reproductive system be locate in close proximity to the urinary system .
in male , the urethra be share by the reproductive and urinary system .

what be the major structure of the urinary system , start where urine be form ?

what structure in male be share by the reproductive and the urinary system ?
normal microbiota of the urogenital system
the normal microbiota of different body site provide an important nonspecific defense against infectious disease ( see physical defenses ) , and the urogenital tract be no exception .
in both man and woman , however , the kidney be sterile .
although urine do contain some antibacterial component , bacteria will grow in urine leave out at room temperature .
therefore , - pron - be primarily the flush action that keep the ureter and bladder free of microbe .
below the bladder , the normal microbiota of the male urogenital system be find primarily within the distal urethra and include bacterial specie that be commonly associate with the skin microbiota .
in woman , the normal microbiota be find within the distal one third of the urethra and the vagina .
the normal microbiota of the vagina become establish shortly after birth and be a complex and dynamic population of bacteria that fluctuate in response to environmental change .
member of the vaginal microbiota play an important role in the nonspecific defense against vaginal infection and sexually transmit infection by occupy cellular bind site and compete for nutrient .
in addition , the production of lactic acid by member of the microbiota provide an acidic environment within the vagina that also serve as a defense against infection .
for the majority of woman , the lactic - acid – produce bacteria in the vagina be dominate by a variety of specie of lactobacillus .
for woman who lack sufficient lactobacilli in - pron - vagina , lactic acid production come primarily from other specie of bacteria such as leptotrichia spp .
, megasphaera spp . , and atopobium vagina .
lactobacillus spp .
use glycogen from vaginal epithelial cell for metabolism and production of lactic acid .
this process be tightly regulate by the hormone estrogen .
increase level of estrogen correlate with increase level of vaginal glycogen , increase production of lactic acid , and a low vaginal ph .
therefore , decrease in estrogen during the menstrual cycle and with menopause one  zero  one  four chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five be associate with decrease level of vaginal glycogen and lactic acid , and a high ph .
in addition to produce lactic acid , lactobacillus spp .
also contribute to the defense against infectious disease through - pron - production of hydrogen peroxide and bacteriocin ( antibacterial peptide ) .

what factor affect the microbiota of the female reproductive tract ?
general signs and symptoms of urogenital infections infections of the urinary tract most commonly cause inflammation of the bladder ( cystitis ) or of the urethra ( urethritis ) .
urethritis can be associate with cystitis , but can also be cause by sexually transmit infection .
symptom of urethritis in man include burn sensation while urinating , discharge from the penis , and blood in the seman or the urine .
in woman , urethritis be associate with painful and frequent urination , vaginal discharge , fever , chill , and abdominal pain .
the symptom of cystitis be similar to those of urethritis .
when urethritis be cause by a sexually transmit pathogen , additional symptom involve the genitalia can occur .
these can include painful vesicle ( blister ) , wart , and ulcer .
ureteritis , a rare infection of the ureter , can also occur with cystitis .
these infection can be acute or chronic .
pyelonephritis and glomerulonephriti be infection of the kidney that be potentially serious .
pyelonephritis be an infection of one or both of the kidney and may develop from a low urinary tract infection  the upper urinary tract , include the ureter , be often affect .
sign and symptom of pyelonephritis include fever , chill , nausea , vomiting , low back pain , and frequent painful urination .
pyelonephritis usually only become chronic in individual who have malformation in or damage to the kidney .
glomerulonephritis be an inflammation of the glomeruli of the nephron .
symptom include excessive protein and blood in urine , increase blood pressure , and fluid retention lead to edema of face , hand , and foot .
glomerulonephritis may be an acute infection or - pron - can become chronic .
infection occur within the reproductive structure of male include epididymitis , orchitis , and prostatitis .
bacterial infection may cause inflammation of the epididymis , call epididymitis .
this inflammation cause pain in the scrotum , testicle , and groin  swelling , redness , and warm skin in these area may also be observe .
inflammation of the testicle , call orchitis , be usually cause by a bacterial infection spread from the epididymis , but - pron - can also be a complication of mump , a viral disease .
the symptom be similar to those of epididymitis , and - pron - be not uncommon for - pron - both to occur together , in which case the condition be call epididymo - orchitis .
inflammation of the prostate gland , call prostatitis , can result from a bacterial infection .
the sign and symptom of prostatiti include fever , chill , and pain in the bladder , testicle , and penis .
patient may also experience burn during urination , difficulty empty the bladder , and painful ejaculation .
because of - pron - proximity to the exterior , the vagina be a common site for infection in woman .
the general term for any inflammation of the vagina be vaginitis .
vaginitis often develop as a result of an overgrowth of bacteria or fungi that normally reside in the vaginal microbiota , although - pron - can also result from infection by transient pathogen .
bacterial infection of the vagina be call bacterial vaginosis , whereas fungal infection ( typically involve candida spp . ) be call yeast infection .
dynamic change affect the normal microbiota , acid production , and ph variation can be involve in the initiation of the microbial overgrowth and the development of vaginitis .
although some individual may have no symptom , vaginosis and vaginitis can be associate with discharge , odor , itching , and burn .
pelvic inflammatory disease ( pid ) be an infection of the female reproductive organ include the uterus , cervix , fallopian tube , and ovary .
the two most common pathogen be the sexually transmit bacterial pathogen neisseria gonorrhoeae and chlamydia trachomatis .
inflammation of the fallopian tube , call salpingitis , be the most serious form of pid .
symptom of pid can vary between woman and include pain in the low abdomen , vaginal discharge , fever , chill , nausea , diarrhea , vomiting , and painful urination .
chapter two  three
 urogenital system infections one  zero  one  five

what condition can result from infection affect the urinary system ?

what be some common cause of vaginitis in woman ?
general causes and modes of transmission of urogenital infections hormonal change , particularly shift in estrogen in woman due to pregnancy or menopause , can increase susceptibility to urogenital infection .
as discuss earlier , estrogen play an important role in regulate the availability of glycogen and subsequent production of lactic acid by lactobacillus specie .
low level of estrogen be associate with an increased vaginal ph and an increase risk of bacterial vaginosis and yeast infection .
estrogen also play a role in maintain the elasticity , strength , and thickness of the vaginal wall , and keep the vaginal wall lubricate , reduce dryness .
low level of estrogen be associate with thinning of the vaginal wall .
this thinning increase the risk of tear and abrasion , which compromise the protective barrier and increase susceptibility to pathogen .
another common cause of urogenital infection in female be fecal contamination that occur because of the close proximity of the anus and the urethra .
escherichia coli , an important member of the digestive tract microbiota , be the most common cause of urinary tract infection ( urethritis and cystitis ) in woman  - pron - generally cause infection when - pron - be introduce to the urethra in fecal matter .
good hygiene can reduce the risk of urinary tract infection by this route .
in man , urinary tract infection be more commonly associate with other condition , such as an enlarged prostate , kidney stone , or placement of a urinary catheter .
all of these condition impair the normal emptying of the bladder , which serve to flush out microbe capable of cause infection .
infection that be transmit between individual through sexual contact be call sexually transmit infection ( sti ) or sexually transmit disease ( std ) .
( the cdc prefer the term std , but who prefer sti , [ one ] which encompass infection that result in disease as well as those that be subclinical or asymptomatic . )
sti often affect the external genitalia and skin , where microbe be easily transfer through physical contact .
lymph node in the genital region may also become swollen as a result of infection .
however , many sti have systemic effect as well , cause symptom that range from mild ( e . g . , general malaise ) to severe ( e . g . , liver damage or serious immunosuppression ) .

what role do lactobacillus play in the health of the female reproductive system ?

why do urinary tract infection have different cause in male and female ?
two  three  .  two bacterial infections of the urinary system learning objectives
 identify the most common bacterial pathogen that can cause urinary tract infection  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the urinary tract urinary tract infection ( uti ) include infection of the urethra , bladder , and kidney , and be common cause of one .
world health organization .
“ guidelines for the management of sexually transmitted infections .
” world health organization , two  zero  zero  three .
http / / www . who . int / hiv / pub / sti / en / stiguidelines two  zero  zero  three  . pdf .
one  zero  one  six chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five urethritis , cystitis , pyelonephritis , and glomerulonephritis .
bacteria be the most common cause of uti , especially in the urethra and bladder .
cystitis cystitis be most often cause by a bacterial infection of the bladder , but - pron - can also occur as a reaction to certain treatment or irritant such as radiation treatment , hygiene spray , or spermicide .
common symptom of cystitis include dysuria ( urination accompany by burn , discomfort , or pain ) , pyuria ( pu in the urine ) , hematuria ( blood in the urine ) , and bladder pain .
in woman , bladder infection be more common because the urethra be short and locate in close proximity to the anus , which can result in infection of the urinary tract by fecal bacteria .
bladder infection be also more common in the elderly because the bladder may not empty fully , cause urine to pool  the elderly may also have weak immune system that make - pron - more vulnerable to infection .
condition such as prostatitis in man or kidney stone in both man and woman can impact proper drainage of urine and increase risk of bladder infection .
catheterization can also increase the risk of bladder infection ( see case in point 
cystitis in the elderly ) .
gram - negative bacteria such as escherichia coli ( most commonly ) , proteus vulgaris , pseudomonas aeruginosa , and klebsiella pneumoniae cause most bladder infection .
gram - positive pathogen associate with cystitis include the coagulase - negative staphylococcus saprophyticus , enterococcus faecalis , and streptococcus agalactiae .
routine manual urinalysis use a urine dipstick or test strip can be use for rapid screening of infection .
these test strip ( figure two  three  .  five ) be either hold in a urine stream or dip in a sample of urine to test for the presence of nitrite , leukocyte esterase , protein , or blood that can indicate an active bacterial infection .
the presence of nitrite may indicate the presence of e . coli or k . pneumonia  these bacteria produce nitrate reductase , which convert nitrate to nitrite .
the leukocyte esterase ( le ) test detect the presence of neutrophil as an indication of active infection .
low specificity , sensitivity , or both , associate with these rapid screening test require that care be take in interpretation of result and in - pron - use in diagnosis of urinary tract infection .
therefore , positive le or nitrite result be follow by a urine culture to confirm a bladder infection .
urine culture be generally accomplish use blood agar and macconkey agar , and - pron - be important to culture a clean catch of urine to minimize contamination with normal microbiota of the penis and vagina .
a clean catch of urine be accomplish by first wash the labia and urethral opening of female patient or the penis of male patient .
the patient then release a small amount of urine into the toilet bowl before stop the flow of urine .
finally , the patient resume urination , this time fill the container use to collect the specimen .
bacterial cystitis be commonly treat with fluoroquinolone , nitrofurantoin , cephalosporin , or a combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole .
pain medication may provide relief for patient with dysuria .
treatment be more difficult in elderly patient , who experience a high rate of complication such as sepsis and kidney infection .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  one  seven
figure two  three  .  five
a urine dipstick be compare against a color key to determine level of various chemical , protein , or cell in the urine .
abnormal level may indicate an infection .
( credit  modification of work by suzanne wakim )
cystitis in the elderly robert , an eight  one  - year - old widower with early onset alzheimer 's , be recently move to a nursing home because - pron - be have difficulty live on - pron - own .
within a few week of - pron - arrival , - pron - develop a fever and begin to experience pain associate with urination .
- pron - also begin have episode of confusion and delirium .
the doctor assign to examine robert read - pron - file and notice that robert be treat for prostatitis several year earlier .
when - pron - ask robert how often - pron - have be urinate , robert explain that - pron - have be try not to drink too much so that - pron - do not have to walk to the restroom .
all of this evidence suggest that robert likely have a urinary tract infection .
robert 's age mean that - pron - immune system have probably begin to weaken , and - pron - previous prostate condition may be make - pron - difficult for - pron - to empty - pron - bladder .
in addition , robert 's avoidance of fluid have lead to dehydration and infrequent urination , which may have allow an infection to establish - pron - in - pron - urinary tract .
the fever and dysuria be common sign of a uti in patient of all age , and uti in elderly patient be often accompany by a notable decline in mental function .
physical challenge often discourage elderly individual from urinate as frequently as - pron - would otherwise .
in addition , neurological condition that disproportionately affect the elderly ( e . g . , alzheimer 's and parkinson 's disease ) may also reduce - pron - ability to empty - pron - bladder .
robert 's doctor note that - pron - be have difficulty navigate - pron - new home and recommend that - pron - be give more assistance and that - pron - fluid intake be monitor .
the doctor also take a urine sample and order a laboratory culture to confirm the identity of the causative agent .

why be - pron - important to identify the causative agent in a uti ?

should the doctor prescribe a broad - spectrum or narrow - spectrum antibiotic to treat robert 's uti ?
why ?
case in point one  zero  one  eight chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five kidney infections ( pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis ) pyelonephritis , an inflammation of the kidney , can be cause by bacteria that have spread from other part of the urinary tract ( such as the bladder ) .
in addition , pyelonephritis can develop from bacteria that travel through the bloodstream to the kidney .
when the infection spread from the low urinary tract , the causative agent be typically fecal bacteria such as e . coli .
common sign and symptom include back pain ( due to the location of the kidney ) , fever , and nausea or vomiting .
gross hematuria ( visible blood in the urine ) occur in three  zero – four  zero % of woman but be rare in men . [ two ]
the infection can become serious , potentially lead to bacteremia and systemic effect that can become life - threaten .
scar of the kidney can occur and persist after the infection have clear , which may lead to dysfunction .
diagnosis of pyelonephritis be make use microscopic examination of urine , culture of urine , test for leukocyte esterase and nitrite level , and examination of the urine for blood or protein .
- pron - be also important to use blood culture to evaluate the spread of the pathogen into the bloodstream .
image of the kidney may be perform in highrisk patient with diabetes or immunosuppression , the elderly , patient with previous renal damage , or to rule out an obstruction in the kidney .
pyelonephritis can be treat with either oral or intravenous antibiotic , include penicillin , cephalosporin , vancomycin , fluoroquinolone , carbapenem , and aminoglycosides .
glomerulonephritis occur when the glomeruli of the nephron be damage from inflammation .
whereas pyelonephritis be usually acute , glomerulonephritis may be acute or chronic .
the most well - characterize mechanism of glomerulonephritis be the post - streptococcal sequelae associate with streptococcus pyogene throat and skin infection .
although s . pyogene do not directly infect the glomeruli of the kidney , immune complex that form in blood between s . pyogene antigen and antibody lodge in the capillary endothelial cell junction of the glomeruli and trigger a damaging inflammatory response .
glomerulonephritis can also occur in patient with bacterial endocarditis ( infection and inflammation of heart tissue )  however , - pron - be currently unknown whether glomerulonephritis associate with endocarditis be also immune - mediate .
leptospirosis leptospira be generally harmless spirochete that be commonly find in the soil .
however , some pathogenic specie can cause an infection call leptospirosis in the kidney and other organ ( figure two  three  .  six ) .
leptospirosis can produce fever , headache , chill , vomiting , diarrhea , and rash with severe muscular pain .
if the disease continue to progress , infection of the kidney , meninge , or liver may occur and may lead to organ failure or meningitis .
when the kidney and liver become seriously infected , - pron - be call weil 's disease .
pulmonary hemorrhagic syndrome can also develop in the lung , and jaundice may occur .
leptospira spp .
be find widely in animal such as dog , horse , cattle , pig , and rodent , and be excrete in - pron - urine .
human generally become infect by come in contact with contaminated soil or water , often while swim or during flooding  infection can also occur through contact with body fluid contain the bacteria .
the bacteria may enter the body through mucous membrane , skin injury , or by ingestion .
the mechanism of pathogenicity be not well understand .
leptospirosis be extremely rare in the united states , although - pron - be endemic in hawaii  five  zero % of all case in the united states come from hawaii . [ three ]
- pron - be more common in tropical than in temperate climate , and individual who work with animal or animal product be most at risk .
the bacteria can also be cultivate in specialized medium , with growth observe in broth in a few day to four week  however , diagnosis of leptospirosis be generally make use fast method , such as detection of antibody to leptospira spp .
in patient sample use serologic testing .
polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) , enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisa ) , slide agglutination , and indirect immunofluorescence test may all be use for diagnosis .
treatment for leptospirosis involve broad - spectrum antibiotic such as penicillin and doxycycline .
for more serious case of leptospirosis , antibiotic may be give intravenously .
two .
tibor fulop .
“
acute
pyelonephritis ” medscape , two  zero  one  five .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article /  two  four  five  five  five  nine  - overview .
three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
leptospirosis .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / leptospirosis / health_care_worker .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  one  nine figure two  three  .  six ( a ) dark field view of leptospira sp .
( b ) a scan electron micrograph of leptospira interrogan , a pathogenic specie , show the distinctive spirochete morphology of this genus .
( credit b  modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the most common cause of a kidney infection ?

what be the most common symptom of a kidney infection ?
nongonococcal urethritis ( ngu )
there be two main category of bacterial urethritis  gonorrheal and nongonococcal .
gonorrheal urethritis be cause by neisseria gonorrhoeae and be associate with gonorrhea , a common sti .
this cause of urethritis will be discuss in bacterial infections of the reproductive system .
the term nongonococcal urethritis ( ngu ) refer to inflammation of the urethra that be unrelated to n . gonorrhoeae .
in woman , ngu be often asymptomatic .
in man , ngu be typically a mild disease , but can lead to purulent discharge and dysuria .
because the symptom be often mild or nonexistent , most infected individual do not know that - pron - be infect , yet - pron - be carrier of the disease .
asymptomatic patient also have no reason to seek treatment , and although not common , untreated ngu can spread to the reproductive organ , cause pelvic inflammatory disease and salpingitis in woman and epididymitis and prostatitis in man .
important bacterial pathogen that cause nongonococcal urethritis include chlamydia trachomatis , mycoplasma genitalium , ureaplasma urealyticum , and mycoplasma homini .
c . trachomatis be a difficult - to - stain , gram - negative bacterium with an ovoid shape .
an intracellular pathogen , c . trachomatis cause the most frequently report sti in the united states , chlamydia .
although most person infect with c . trachomatis be asymptomatic , some patient can present with ngu .
c . trachomatis can also cause nonurogenital infection such as the ocular disease trachoma ( see bacterial infections of the skin and eyes ) .
the life cycle of c . trachomatis be illustrate in figure four  .  five .
c . trachomatis have multiple possible virulence factor that be currently be study to evaluate - pron - role in cause disease .
these include polymorphic outer - membrane autotransporter protein , stress response protein , and type iii secretion effector .
the type iii secretion effector have be identify in gram - negative pathogen , include c . trachomatis .
this virulence factor be an assembly of more than two  zero protein that form what be call an injectisome for the transfer of other effector protein that target the infected host cell .
the outer - membrane autotransporter protein be also an effective mechanism of deliver virulence factor involve in colonization , disease progression , and one  zero  two  zero chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five immune system evasion .
other specie associate with ngu include mycoplasma genitalium , ureaplasma urealyticum , and mycoplasma homini .
these bacteria be commonly find in the normal microbiota of healthy individual , who may acquire - pron - during birth or through sexual contact , but - pron - can sometimes cause infection lead to urethritis ( in male and female ) or vaginitis and cervicitis ( in female ) .
m . genitalium be a more common cause of urethritis in most setting than n . gonorrhoeae , although - pron - be less common than c . trachomatis .
- pron - be responsible for approximately three  zero % of recurrent or persistent infection , two  zero – two  five % of nonchlamydial ngu case , and one  five %– two  zero % of ngu case .
m . genitalium attache to epithelial cell and have substantial antigenic variation that help - pron - evade host immune response .
- pron - have lipid - associate membrane protein that be involve in cause inflammation .
several possible virulence factor have be implicate in the pathogenesis of u . urealyticum ( figure two  three  .  seven ) .
these include the ureaplasma protein phospholipase a , phospholipase c , multiple banded antigen ( mba ) , urease , and immunoglobulin α protease .
the phospholipase be virulence factor that damage the cytoplasmic membrane of target cell .
the immunoglobulin α protease be an important defense against antibody .
- pron - can generate hydrogen peroxide , which may adversely affect host cell membrane through the production of reactive oxygen specie .
treatment differ for gonorrheal and nongonococcal urethritis .
however , n . gonorrhoeae and c . trachomatis be often simultaneously present , which be an important consideration for treatment .
ngu be most commonly treat use tetracycline ( such as doxycycline ) and azithromycin  erythromycin be an alternative option .
tetracycline and fluoroquinolone be most commonly use to treat u . urealyticum , but resistance to tetracycline be become an increase problem . [ four ]
while tetracycline have be the treatment of choice for m . homini , increase resistance mean that other option must be use .
clindamycin and fluoroquinolone be alternative .
m . genitalium be generally susceptible to doxycycline , azithromycin , and moxifloxacin .
like other mycoplasma , m . genitalium do not have a cell wall and therefore β - lactams ( include penicillin and cephalosporin ) be not effective treatment .
figure two  three  .  seven ureaplasma urealyticum microcolonie ( white arrow ) on agar surface after anaerobic incubation , visualize use phase contrast microscopy ( eight  zero  zero × ) .
the black arrow indicate cellular debris .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )

what be the three most common cause of urethritis ?

what three member of the normal microbiota can cause urethritis ?
four .
ken b waites .
“ ureaplasma infection medication .
”
medscape , two  zero  one  five .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article /  two  three  one  four  seven  zero  - medication .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  two  one bacterial infections of the urinary tract urinary tract infection can cause inflammation of the urethra ( urethritis ) , bladder ( cystitis ) , and kidney ( pyelonephritis ) , and can sometimes spread to other body system through the bloodstream .
figure two  three  .  eight capture the most important feature of various type of uti .
figure two  three  .  eight disease profile one  zero  two  two chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  three  .  three bacterial infections of the reproductive system
learning objectives
 identify the most common bacterial pathogen that can cause infection of the reproductive system  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the reproductive system
in addition to infection of the urinary tract , bacteria commonly infect the reproductive tract .
as with the urinary tract , part of the reproductive system close to the external environment be the most likely site of infection .
often , the same microbe be capable of cause urinary tract and reproductive tract infection .
bacterial vaginitis and vaginosis inflammation of the vagina be call vaginitis , often cause by a bacterial infection .
- pron - be also possible to have an imbalance in the normal vaginal microbiota without inflammation call bacterial vaginosis ( bv ) .
vaginosis may be asymptomatic or may cause mild symptom such as a thin , white - to - yellow , homogeneous vaginal discharge , burning , odor , and itch .
the major causative agent be gardnerella vaginalis , a gram - variable to gram - negative pleomorphic bacterium .
other causative agent include anaerobic specie such as member of the genera bacteroides and fusobacterium .
additionally , ureaplasma and mycoplasma may be involve .
the disease be usually self - limit , although antibiotic treatment be recommend if symptom develop .
g . vaginalis appear to be more virulent than other vaginal bacterial specie potentially associate with bv .
like lactobacillus spp .
, g . vaginalis be part of the normal vaginal microbiota , but when the population of lactobacillus spp . decrease and the vaginal ph increase , g . vaginalis flourish , cause vaginosis by attach to vaginal epithelial cell and form a thick protective biofilm .
g . vaginalis also produce a cytotoxin call vaginolysin that lyse vaginal epithelial cell and red blood cell .
since g . vaginalis can also be isolate from healthy woman , the “ gold standard " for the diagnosis of bv be direct examination of vaginal secretion and not the culture of g . vaginalis .
diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis from vaginal secretion can be accurately make in three way .
the first be to use a dna probe .
the second method be to assay for sialidase activity ( sialidase be an enzyme produce by g . vaginalis and other bacteria associate with vaginosis , include bacteroides spp .
, prevotella spp . , and mobiluncus spp . ) .
the third method be to assess gram - stain vaginal smear for microscopic morphology and relative number and type of bacteria , squamous epithelial cell , and leukocyte .
by examine slide prepare from vaginal swab , - pron - be possible to distinguish lactobacilli ( long , grampositive rod ) from other gram - negative specie responsible for bv .
a shift in predominance from gram - positive bacilli to gram - negative coccobacilli can indicate bv .
additionally , the slide may contain so - call clue cell , which be epithelial cell that appear to have a granular or stippled appearance due to bacterial cell attach to - pron - surface ( figure two  three  .  nine ) .
presumptive diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis can involve an assessment of clinical symptom and evaluation of vaginal fluid use amsel 's diagnostic criterion which include three out of four of the follow characteristic  one . white to yellow discharge  two .
a fishy odor , most noticeable when one  zero % koh be add  three .
ph great than four  .  five  four .
the presence of clue cell .
treatment be often unnecessary because the infection often clear on - pron - own .
however , in some case , antibiotic such as topical or oral clindamycin or metronidazole may be prescribe .
alternative treatment include oral tinidazole or clindamycin ovule ( vaginal suppository ) .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  two  three figure two  three  .  nine
in this vaginal smear , the cell at the low left be a clue cell with a unique appearance cause by the presence of bacteria on the cell .
the cell on the right be a normal cell .

explain the difference between vaginosis and vaginitis .

what organism be responsible for vaginosis and what organism typically hold - pron - at bay ?
part two there be no catch - all test for sti , so several test , in addition to a physical exam , be necessary to diagnose an infection .
nadia try to relax in the exam room while - pron - wait for the doctor to return , but - pron - be nervous about the result .
when the doctor finally return , - pron - have some unexpected news  nadia be pregnant .
surprised and excited , nadia want to know if the pregnancy explain - pron - unusual symptom .
the doctor explain that the irritation that nadia be experience be vaginitis , which can be cause by several type of microorganism .
one possibility be bacterial vaginosis , which develop when there be an imbalance in the bacteria in the vagina , as often occur during pregnancy .
vaginosis can increase the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight , and a few study have also show that - pron - can cause second - trimester miscarriage  however , the condition can be treat .
to check for - pron - , the doctor have ask the lab to perform a gram stain on nadia 's sample .

what result would - pron - expect from the gram stain if nadia have bacterial vaginosis ?
clinical focus one  zero  two  four chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
what be the relationship between pregnancy , estrogen level , and development of bacterial vaginosis ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
gonorrhea also know as the clap , gonorrhea be a common sexually transmit disease of the reproductive system that be especially prevalent in individual between the age of one  five and two  four .
- pron - be cause by neisseria gonorrhoeae , often call gonococcus or gc , which have fimbriae that allow the cell to attach to epithelial cell .
- pron - also have a type of lipopolysaccharide endotoxin call lipooligosaccharide as part of the outer membrane structure that enhance - pron - pathogenicity .
in addition to cause urethritis , n . gonorrhoeae can infect other body tissue such as the skin , meninge , pharynx , and conjunctiva .
many infect individual ( both man and woman ) be asymptomatic carrier of gonorrhea .
when symptom do occur , - pron - manifest differently in male and female .
male may develop pain and burn during urination and discharge from the penis that may be yellow , green , or white ( figure two  three  .  one  zero ) .
less commonly , the testicle may become swollen or tender .
over time , these symptom can increase and spread .
in some case , chronic infection develop .
the disease can also develop in the rectum , cause symptom such as discharge , soreness , bleeding , itching , and pain ( especially in association with bowel movement ) .
figure two  three  .  one  zero ( a ) clinical photograph of gonococcal discharge from penis .
the lesion on the skin could indicate coinfection with another sti .
( b ) purulent discharge originate from the cervix and accumulate in the vagina of a patient with gonorrhea .
( c )
a micrograph of urethral discharge show gram - negative diplococci ( pair cell ) both inside and outside the leukocyte ( large cell with lob nucleus ) .
these result could be use to diagnose gonorrhea in a male patient , but female vaginal sample may contain other neisseria spp .
even if the patient be not infect with n . gonorrhoeae .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
women may develop pelvic pain , discharge from the vagina , intermenstrual bleeding ( i . e . , bleed not associate with normal menstruation ) , and pain or irritation associate with urination .
as with man , the infection can become chronic .
in woman , however , chronic infection can cause increase in menstrual flow .
rectal infection can also occur , with the symptom previously describe for man .
infection that spread to the endometrium and fallopian tube can cause pelvic inflammatory disease ( pid ) , characterize by pain in the low abdominal region , dysuria , vaginal chapter two  three
 urogenital system infections one  zero  two  five discharge , and fever .
pid can also lead to infertility through scarring and blockage of the fallopian tube ( salpingitis )  - pron - may also increase the risk of a life - threaten ectopic pregnancy , which occur when a fertilized egg begin develop somewhere other than the uterus ( e . g . , in the fallopian tube or ovary ) .
when a gonorrhea infection disseminate throughout the body , serious complication can develop .
the infection may spread through the blood ( bacteremia ) and affect organ throughout the body , include the heart ( gonorrheal endocarditis ) , joint ( gonorrheal arthritis ) , and meninge encase the brain ( meningitis ) .
urethritis cause by n . gonorrhoeae can be difficult to treat due to antibiotic resistance ( see micro connections ) .
some strain have develop resistance to the fluoroquinolone , so cephalosporin be often a first choice for treatment .
because co - infection with c . trachomatis be common , the cdc recommend treat with a combination regiman of ceftriaxone and azithromycin .
treatment of sexual partner be also recommend to avoid reinfection and spread of infection to others . [ five ]

what be some of the serious consequence of a gonorrhea infection ?

what organism commonly coinfect with n . gonorrhoeae ?
antibiotic resistance in neisseria antibiotic resistance in many pathogen be steadily increase , cause serious concern throughout the public health community .
increase resistance have be especially notable in some specie , such as neisseria gonorrhoeae .
the cdc monitor the spread of antibiotic resistance in n . gonorrhoeae , which - pron - classify as an urgent threat , and make recommendation for treatment .
so far , n . gonorrhoeae have show resistance to cefixime ( a cephalosporin ) , ceftriaxone ( another cephalosporin ) , azithromycin , and tetracycline .
resistance to tetracycline be the most common , and be see in one  eight  eight  ,  six  zero  zero case of gonorrhea in two  zero  one  one ( out of a total eight  two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero case ) .
in two  zero  one  one , some two  four  six  ,  zero  zero  zero case of gonorrhea involved strain of n . gonorrhoeae that be resistant to at least one antibiotic . [ six ]
these resistance gene be spread by plasmid , and a single bacterium may be resistant to multiple antibiotic .
the cdc currently recommend treatment with two medication , ceftriaxone and azithromycin , to attempt to slow the spread of resistance .
if resistance to cephalosporin increase , - pron - will be extremely difficult to control the spread of n . gonorrhoeae .
chlamydia chlamydia trachomatis be the causative agent of the sti chlamydia ( figure two  three  .  one  one ) .
while many chlamydia infection be asymptomatic , chlamydia be a major cause of nongonococcal urethritis ( ngu ) and may also cause epididymitis and orchitis in man .
in woman , chlamydia infection can cause urethritis , salpingitis , and pid .
in addition , chlamydial infection may be associate with an increase risk of cervical cancer .
because chlamydia be widespread , often asymptomatic , and have the potential to cause substantial complication , routine screening be recommend for sexually active woman who be under age two  five , at high risk ( i . e . , not in a monogamous relationship ) , or begin prenatal care .
micro connections five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ two  zero  one  five
sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines  gonococcal infections , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / tg two  zero  one  five  / gonorrhea . htm .
six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
antibiotic resistance threats in the united states , two  zero  one  three , " two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . cdc . gov / drugresistance / pdf / ar - threats -  two  zero  one  three - five  zero  eight  . pdf .
one  zero  two  six chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five certain serovar of c . trachomatis can cause an infection of the lymphatic system in the groin know as lymphogranuloma venereum .
this condition be commonly find in tropical region and can also co - occur in conjunction with human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) infection .
after the microbe invade the lymphatic system , bubo ( large lymph node , see figure two  three  .  one  one ) form and can burst , release pu through the skin .
the male genital can become greatly enlarge and in woman the rectum may become narrow .
urogenital infection cause by c . trachomatis can be treat use azithromycin or doxycycline ( the recommend regiman from the cdc ) .
erythromycin , levofloxacin , and ofloxacin be alternative .
figure two  three  .  one  one ( a ) chlamydia trachomatis inclusion body within mccoy cell monolayer .
inclusion body be distinguish by - pron - brown color .
( b ) lymphogranuloma venereum infection can cause swollen lymph node in the groin call bubo .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by herbert l . fred and hendrik a . van dijk )

compare the sign and symptom of chlamydia infection in man and woman .
syphilis syphilis be spread through direct physical ( generally sexual ) contact , and be cause by the gram - negative spirochete treponema pallidum .
t . pallidum have a relatively simple genome and lack lipopolysaccharide endotoxin characteristic of gram - negative bacteria .
however , - pron - do contain lipoprotein that trigger an immune response in the host , cause tissue damage that may enhance the pathogen 's ability to disseminate while evade the host immune system .
after enter the body , t . pallidum move rapidly into the bloodstream and other tissue .
if not treat effectively , syphilis progress through three distinct stage  primary , secondary , and tertiary .
primary syphilis appear as a single lesion on the cervix , penis , or anus within one  zero to nine  zero day of transmission .
such lesion contain many t . pallidum cell and be highly infectious .
the lesion , call a hard chancre , be initially hard and painless , but - pron - soon develop into an ulcerated sore ( figure two  three  .  one  two ) .
localize lymph node swell may occur as well .
in some case , these symptom may be relatively mild , and the lesion may heal on - pron - own within two to six week .
because the lesion be painless and often occur in hide location ( e . g . , the cervix or anus ) , infected individual sometimes do not notice - pron - .
the secondary stage generally develop once the primary chancre have heal or begin to heal .
secondary syphilis be characterize by a rash that affect the skin and mucous membrane of the mouth , vagina , or anus .
the rash often begin on the palm or the sol of the foot and spread to the trunk and the limb ( figure two  three  .  one  two ) .
the rash may take many form , such as macular or papular .
on mucous membrane , - pron - may manifest as mucus patch or white , wartlike lesion call condylomata lata .
the rash may be accompany by malaise , fever , and swelling of
lymph chapter two  three  urogenital system infections one  zero  two  seven node .
individual be highly contagious in the secondary stage , which last two to six week and be recurrent in about two  five % of case .
after the secondary phase , syphilis can enter a latent phase , in which there be no symptom but microbial level remain high .
blood test can still detect the disease during latency .
the latent phase can persist for year .
tertiary syphilis , which may occur one  zero to two  zero year after infection , produce the most severe symptom and can be fatal .
granulomatous lesion call gumma may develop in a variety of location , include mucous membrane , bone , and internal organ ( figure two  three  .  one  two ) .
gummas can be large and destructive , potentially cause massive tissue damage .
the most deadly lesion be those of the cardiovascular system ( cardiovascular syphilis ) and the central nervous system ( neurosyphilis ) .
cardiovascular syphilis can result in a fatal aortic aneurysm ( rupture of the aorta ) or coronary stenosis ( a blockage of the coronary artery ) .
damage to the central nervous system can cause dementia , personality change , seizure , general paralysis , speech impairment , loss of vision and hearing , and loss of bowel and bladder control .
figure two  three  .  one  two
( a )
this ulcerated sore be a hard chancre cause by syphilis .
( b )
this individual have a secondary syphilis rash on the hand .
( c ) tertiary syphilis produce lesion call gumma , such as this one locate on the nose .
( credit a , b , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
the recommend method for diagnose early syphili be darkfield or brightfield ( silver stain ) microscopy of tissue or exudate from lesion to detect t . pallidum ( figure two  three  .  one  three ) .
if these method be not available , two type of serologic test ( treponemal and nontreponemal ) can be use for a presumptive diagnosis once the spirochete have spread in the body .
nontreponemal serologic test include the venereal disease research laboratory ( vdrl ) and rapid plasma reagin ( rpr ) test .
these be similar screening test that detect nonspecific antibody ( those for lipid antigen produce during infection ) rather than those produce against the spirochete .
treponemal serologic test measure antibody direct against t . pallidum antigen use particle agglutination ( t . pallidum passive particle agglutination or tp - pa ) , immunofluorescence ( the fluorescent t . pallidum antibody absorption or fta - abs ) , various enzyme reaction ( enzyme immunoassay or eia ) and chemiluminescence immunoassay ( cia ) .
confirmatory testing , rather than screening , must be do use treponemal rather than nontreponemal test because only the former test for antibody to spirochete antigen .
both treponemal and nontreponemal test should be use ( as oppose to just one ) since both test have limitation than can result in false positive or false negative .
neurosyphilis can not be diagnose use a single test .
with or without clinical sign , - pron - be generally necessary to assess a variety of factor , include reactive serologic test result , cerebrospinal fluid cell count abnormality , cerebrospinal fluid protein abnormality , or reactive vdrl - csf ( the vdrl test of cerebrospinal fluid ) .
the vdrlcsf be highly specific , but not sufficiently sensitive for conclusive diagnosis .
the recommend treatment for syphilis be parenteral penicillin g ( especially long - act benzathine penicillin , although the exact choice depend on the stage of disease ) .
other option include tetracycline and doxycycline .
one  zero  two  eight chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  one  three
( a ) darkfield micrograph of treponema pallidum .
( b ) silver stain micrograph of the same specie .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
congenital syphilis congenital syphilis be pass by mother to fetus when untreated primary or secondary syphilis be present .
in many case , infection may lead to miscarriage or stillbirth .
child bear with congenital syphilis show symptom of secondary syphilis and may develop mucus patch that deform the nose .
in infant , gumma can cause significant tissue damage to organ and tooth .
many other complication may develop , such as osteochondritis , anemia , blindness , bone deformation , neurosyphilis , and cardiovascular lesion .
because congenital syphilis pose such a risk to the fetus , expectant mother be screen for syphilis infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the torch panel of prenatal test .

what aspect of tertiary syphilis can lead to death ?

how do treponemal serologic test detect an infection ?
chancroid
the sexually transmit infection chancroid be cause by the gram - negative rod haemophilus ducreyi .
- pron - be characterize by soft chancre ( figure two  three  .  one  four ) on the genital or other area associate with sexual contact , such as the mouth and anus .
unlike the hard chancre associate with syphilis , soft chancre develop into painful , open sore that may bleed or produce fluid that be highly contagious .
in addition to cause chancre , the bacteria can invade the lymph node , potentially lead to pu discharge through the skin from lymph node in the groin .
like other genital lesion , soft chancre be of particular concern because - pron - compromise the protective barrier of the skin or mucous membrane , make individual more susceptible to hiv and other sexually transmit disease .
several virulence factor have be associate with h . ducreyi , include lipooligosaccharide , protective outer membrane protein , antiphagocytic protein , secretory protein , and collagen - specific adhesin
ncaa .
the collagenspecific adhesion
ncaa play an important role in initial cellular attachment and colonization .
outer membrane protein dsra and dlta have be show to provide protection from serum - mediate killing by antibody and complement .
h . ducreyi be difficult to culture  thus , diagnosis be generally base on clinical observation of genital ulcer and test that rule out other disease with similar ulcer , such as syphilis and genital herpe .
pcr test for h . ducreyi have be develop in some laboratory , but as of two  zero  one  five none have be clear by the us food and drug administration ( fda ) . [ seven ] recommend treatment for chancroid include antibiotic such as azithromycin , ciprofloxacin , chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  two  nine erythromycin and ceftriaxone .
resistance to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin have be reported . [ eight ]
figure two  three  .  one  four ( a )
a soft chancre on the penis of a man with chancroid .
( b ) chancroid be cause by the gram - negative bacterium haemophilus ducreyi , see here in a gram - stain culture of rabbit blood .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the key difference between chancroid lesion and those associate with syphilis ?

why be - pron - difficult to definitively diagnose chancroid ?
bacterial reproductive tract infections
many bacterial infection affect the reproductive system be transmit through sexual contact , but some can be transmit by other mean .
in the united states , gonorrhea and chlamydia be common illness with incidence of about three  five  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero and one  .  four  four million , respectively , in two  zero  one  four .
syphilis be a rare disease with an incidence of two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero in two  zero  one  four .
chancroid be exceedingly rare in the united states with only six case in two  zero  one  four and a median of one  zero case per year for the year two  zero  one  zero – two  zero  one  four  . [ nine ] figure two  three  .  one  five summarize bacterial infection of the reproductive tract .
disease profile seven .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ two  zero  one  five
sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 
chancroid , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / tg two  zero  one  five  / chancroid . htm .
eight .
ibid .
nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
two  zero  one  four
sexually transmitted disease surveillance , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / stats one  four  / default . htm .
one  zero  three  zero chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  one  five chapter two  three
 urogenital system infections one  zero  three  one two  three  .  four viral infections of the reproductive system
learning objectives
 identify the most common virus that cause infection of the reproductive system  compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease affect the reproductive system several virus can cause serious problem for the human reproductive system .
most of these viral infection be incurable , increase the risk of persistent sexual transmission .
in addition , such viral infection be very common in the united states .
for example , human papillomavirus ( hpv ) be the most common sti in the country , with an estimate prevalence of seven  nine  .  one million infection in two  zero  zero  eight  herpe simplex virus two ( hsv -  two )
be the next most prevalent sti at two  four  .  one million infections . [ one  zero ]
in this section , - pron - will examine these and other major viral infection of the reproductive system .
genital herpes genital herpe be a common condition cause by the herpe simplex virus ( figure two  three  .  one  six ) , an envelop , doublestranded dna virus that be classify into two distinct type .
herpes simplex virus have several virulence factor , include infect cell protein ( icp ) three  four  .  five , which help in replication and inhibit the maturation of dendritic cell as a mechanism of avoid elimination by the immune system .
in addition , surface glycoprotein on the viral envelope promote the coating of herpe simplex virus with antibody and complement factor , allow the virus to appear as " self " and prevent immune system activation and elimination .
there be two herpe simplex virus type .
while herpe simplex virus type one ( hsv -  one ) be generally associate with oral lesion like cold sore or fever blister ( see viral infections of the skin and eyes ) , herpe simplex virus type two ( hsv -  two ) be usually associate with genital herpe .
however , both virus can infect either location as well as other part of the body .
oral - genital contact can spread either virus from the mouth to the genital region or vice versa .
figure two  three  .  one  six virion of the herpe
simplex virus be show here in this transmission electron micrograph .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
many infect individual do not develop symptom , and thus do not realize that - pron - carry the virus .
however , in some infect individual , fever , chill , malaise , swollen lymph node , and pain precede the development of fluidfille vesicle that may be irritate and uncomfortable .
when these vesicle burst , - pron - release infectious fluid and allow transmission of hsv .
in addition , open herpe lesion can increase the risk of spread or acquire hiv .
in man , the herpe lesion typically develop on the penis and may be accompany by a watery discharge .
in woman , the vesicle develop most commonly on the vulva , but may also develop on the vagina or cervix ( figure two  three  .  one  seven ) .
one  zero .
catherine lindsey satterwhite , elizabeth torrone , elissa meites , eileen f . dunne , reena mahajan , m . cheryl bañez ocfemia , john su , fujie xu , and hillard weinstock .
“
sexually transmit infections among us women and men 
prevalence and incidence estimates , two  zero  zero  eight .
" sexually transmitted diseases four  zero , no .
three ( two  zero  one  three )  one  eight  seven – one  nine  three .
one  zero  three  two chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the symptom be typically mild , although the lesion may be irritate or accompany by urinary discomfort .
use of condom may not always be an effective mean of prevent transmission of genital herpe since the lesion can occur on area other than the genital .
figure two  three  .  one  seven genital herpe be typically characterize by lesion on the genital ( left ) , but lesion can also appear elsewhere on the skin or mucous membrane ( right ) .
the lesion can be large and painful or small and easily overlook .
( credit b  modification of work by schiffer jt , swan d , al sallaq r , magaret a , johnston c , mark ke , selke s , ocbamichael n , kuntz s , zhu j , robinson b , huang ml , jerome kr , wald a , and corey )
herpes simplex virus can cause recurrent infection because the virus can become latent and then be reactivate .
this occur more commonly with hsv -  two than with hsv -  one  . [ one  one ]
the virus move down peripheral nerve , typically sensory neuron , to ganglia in the spine ( either the trigeminal ganglion or the lumbar - sacral ganglia ) and become latent .
reactivation can later occur , cause the formation of new vesicle .
hsv -  two most effectively reactivate from the lumbar - sacral ganglia .
not everyone infect with hsv -  two experience reactivation , which be typically associate with stressful condition , and the frequency of reactivation vary throughout life and among individual .
between outbreak or when there be no obvious vesicle , the virus can still be transmit .
virologic and serologic technique be use for diagnosis .
the virus may be culture from lesion .
the immunostaining method that be use to detect virus from culture generally require less expertise than method base on cytopathic effect ( cpe ) , as well as be a less expensive option .
however , pcr or other dna amplification method may be prefer because - pron - provide the most rapid result without wait for culture amplification .
pcr be also good for detect systemic infection .
serologic technique be also useful in some circumstance , such as when symptom persist but pcr testing be negative .
while there be no cure or vaccine for hsv -  two infection , antiviral medication be available that manage the infection by keep the virus in - pron - dormant or latent phase , reduce sign and symptom .
if the medication be discontinue , then the condition return to - pron - original severity .
the recommend medication , which may be take at the start of an outbreak or daily as a method of prophylaxis , be acyclovir , famciclovir , and valacyclovir .
neonatal herpes herpes infection in newborn , refer to as neonatal herpe , be generally transmit from the mother to the neonate during childbirth , when the child be expose to pathogen in the birth canal .
infection can occur regardless of whether lesion be present in the birth canal .
in most case , the infection of the newborn be limit to skin , mucous membrane , and eye , and outcome be good .
however , sometimes the virus become disseminate and spread to the central nervous system , result in motor function deficit or death .
in some case , infection can occur before birth when the virus cross the placenta .
this can cause serious complication in fetal development and may result in spontaneous abortion or severe disability if the fetus survive .
the condition be most serious when the mother be infect with hsv for the first time during pregnancy .
thus , one  one .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ two  zero  one  five
sexually transmitted disease treatment guidelines  genital herpes , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / tg two  zero  one  five  / herpes . htm .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infection one  zero  three  three expectant mother be screen for hsv infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the torch panel of prenatal test ( see how pathogens cause disease ) .
systemic acyclovir treatment be recommend to treat newborn with neonatal herpe .
 why be latent herpe virus infection still of clinical concern ?

how be neonatal herpe contract ?
human papillomas warts of all type be cause by a variety of strain of human papillomavirus ( hpv ) ( see viral infections of the skin and eyes ) .
condylomata acuminata , more commonly call genital wart or venereal wart ( figure two  three  .  one  eight ) , be an extremely prevalent sti cause by certain strain of hpv .
condylomata be irregular , soft , pink growth that be find on external genitalia or the anus .
hpv be a small , non - enveloped virus with a circular double - strand dna genome .
researcher have identify over two  zero  zero different strain ( call type ) of hpv , with approximately four  zero causing sti .
while some type of hpv cause genital wart , hpv infection be often asymptomatic and self - limit .
however , genital hpv infection often co - occur with other sti like syphilis or gonorrhea .
additionally , some form of hpv ( not the same one associate with genital wart ) be associate with cervical cancer .
at least one  four oncogenic ( cancer - cause )
hpv type be know to have a causal association with cervical cancer .
example of oncogenic hpv be type one  six and one  eight , which be associate with seven  zero % of cervical cancers . [ one  two ]
oncogenic hpv type can also cause oropharyngeal cancer , anal cancer , vaginal cancer , vulvar cancer , and penile cancer .
most of these cancer be cause by hpv type one  six .
hpv virulence factor include protein ( e six and e seven ) that be capable of inactivate tumor suppressor protein , lead to uncontrolled cell division and the development of cancer .
hpv can not be culture , so molecular test be the primary method use to detect hpv .
while routine hpv screening be not recommend for man , - pron - be include in guideline for woman .
an initial screening for hpv at age three  zero , conduct at the same time as a pap test , be recommend .
if the test be negative , then further hpv testing be recommend every five year .
more frequent testing may be need in some case .
the protocol use to collect , transport , and store sample vary base on both the type of hpv testing and the purpose of the testing .
this should be determine in individual case in consultation with the laboratory that will perform the testing .
because hpv testing be often conduct concurrently with pap testing , the most common approach use a single sample collection within one vial for both .
this approach use liquid - base cytology ( lbc ) .
the sample be then use for pap smear cytology as well as hpv testing and genotyping .
hpv can be recognize in pap smear by the presence of cell call koilocyte ( call koilocytosis or koilocytotic atypia ) .
koilocyte have a hyperchromatic atypical nucleus that stain darkly and a high ratio of nuclear material to cytoplasm .
there be a distinct clear appearance around the nucleus call a perinuclear halo ( figure two  three  .  one  nine ) .
one  two .
lauren thaxton and alan g . waxman .
“
cervical cancer prevention  immunization and screen two  zero  one  five .
"
medical clinics of north america nine  nine , no .
three ( two  zero  one  five )  four  six  nine – four  seven  seven . one  zero  three  four
chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  one  eight
genital wart may occur around the anus ( leave ) or genitalia ( right ) .
( credit leave , right  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) figure two  three  .  one  nine
in this image , the cervical cell on the left be normal and those on the right show enlarged nucleus and hyperchromasia ( darkly stain nucleus ) typical of hpv - infect koilocyte .
( credit  modification of work by ed uthman )
most hpv infection resolve spontaneously  however , various therapy be use to treat and remove wart .
topical medication such as imiquimod ( which stimulate the production of interferon ) , podofilox , or sinecatechin , may be effective .
wart can also be remove use cryotherapy or surgery , but these approach be less effective for genital wart than for other type of wart .
electrocauterization and carbon dioxide laser therapy be also use for wart removal .
regular pap testing can detect abnormal cell that may progress to cervical cancer , follow by biopsy and appropriate treatment .
vaccine for some of the high risk hpv type be now available .
gardasil vaccine include type six , one  one , one  six and one  eight ( type six and one  one be associate with nine  zero % of genital wart infection and type one  six and one  eight be associate with seven  zero % of cervical cancer ) .
gardasil nine vaccinate against the previous four type and an additional five high - risk type ( three  one , three  three , four  five , five  two , and five  eight ) .
cervarix vaccine include just hpv type one  six and one  eight .
vaccination be the most effective way to prevent infection with oncogenic hpv , but - pron - be important to note that not all oncogenic hpv type be cover by the available vaccine .
- pron - be recommend for both boy and girl prior to sexual activity ( usually between the age of nine and fifteen ) .
chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  three  five
watch a video ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two hpvpercep ) of how perception of hpv affect vaccination rate .

what be diagnostic of an hpv infection in a pap smear ?

what be the motivation for hpv vaccination ?
secret stis few people who have an sti ( or think - pron - may have one ) be eager to share that information publicly .
in fact , many patient be even uncomfortable discuss the symptom privately with - pron - doctor .
unfortunately , the social stigma associate with sti make - pron - hard for infect individual to seek the treatment - pron - need and create the false perception that sti be rare .
in reality , sti be quite common , but - pron - be difficult to determine exactly how common .
a recent study on the effect of hpv vaccination find a baseline hpv prevalence of two  six  .  eight % for woman between the age of one  four and five  nine .
among woman aged two  zero – two  four , the prevalence be four  four  .  eight %  in other word , almost half of the woman in this age bracket have a current infection . [ one  three ]
accord to the cdc , hsv -  two infection be estimate to have a prevalence of one  five  .  five % in young individual ( one  four – four  nine year of age ) in two  zero  zero  seven – two  zero  one  zero , down from two  zero  .  three % in the same age group in one  nine  eight  eight – one  nine  nine  four .
however , the cdc estimate that eight  seven  .  four % of infected individual in this age group have not be diagnose by a physician . [ one  four ]
another complicating factor be that many sti can be asymptomatic or have long period of latency .
for example , the cdc estimate that among woman age one  four – four  nine in the united states , about two  .  three million ( three  .  one % ) be infect with the sexually transmit protozoan trichomonas ( see protozoan infections of the urogenital system )  however , in a study of infect woman , eight  five % of those diagnose with the infection be asymptomatic . [ one  five ]
even when patient be treat for symptomatic sti , - pron - can be difficult to obtain accurate datum on the number of case .
whereas sti like chlamydia , gonorrhea , and syphilis be notifiable disease - mean each diagnosis must be report by healthcare provider to the cdc - other sti be not notifiable ( e . g . , genital herpe , genital wart , and trichomoniasis ) .
between the social taboo , the inconsistency of symptom , and the lack of mandatory reporting , - pron - can be difficult to estimate the true prevalence of sti -
but - pron - be safe to say - pron - be much more prevalent than most people think .
link to learning micro connections one  three .
eileen f . dunne , elizabeth r . unger , maya sternberg , geraldine mcquillan , david c . swan , sonya s . patel , and lauri e . markowitz .
“
prevalence of hpv infection among females in the united states .
” journal of the american medical association two  nine  seven , no .
eight ( two  zero  zero  seven )  eight  one  three – eight  one  nine .
one  four .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
genital herpes - cdc fact sheet , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / herpes / stdfact - herpesdetail .
htm .
one  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
trichomoniasis statistics , " two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / std / trichomonas / stats . htm .
one  zero  three  six chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five viral reproductive tract infections figure two  three  .  two  zero summarize the most important feature of viral disease affect the human reproductive tract .
figure two  three  .  two  zero two  three  .  five fungal infections of the reproductive system
learning objectives
 summarize the important characteristic of vaginal candidiasis only one major fungal pathogen affect the urogenital system .
candida be a genus of fungi capable of exist in a yeast form or as a multicellular fungus .
candida spp . be commonly find in the normal , healthy microbiota of the skin , gastrointestinal tract , respiratory system , and female urogenital tract ( figure two  three  .  two  one ) .
- pron - can be pathogenic due to - pron - ability to adhere to and invade host cell , form biofilm , secrete hydrolase ( e . g . , protease , phospholipase , and lipase ) that assist in - pron - spread through tissue , and change - pron - phenotype to protect - pron - from the immune system .
however , - pron - typically only cause disease in the female reproductive tract under condition that compromise the host 's defense .
while there be at least two  zero candida specie of clinical importance , c . albican be the specie most commonly responsible for fungal vaginitis .
disease profile chapter two  three 
urogenital system infections one  zero  three  seven
as discuss earlier , lactobacilli in the vagina inhibit the growth of other organism , include bacteria and candida , but disruption can allow candida to increase in number .
typical disruption include antibiotic therapy , illness ( especially diabetes ) , pregnancy , and the presence of transient microbe .
immunosuppression can also play a role , and the severe immunosuppression associate with hiv infection often allow candida to thrive .
this can cause genital or vaginal candidiasis , a condition characterize by vaginitis and commonly know as a yeast infection .
when a yeast infection develop , inflammation occur along with symptom of pruritus ( itching ) , a thick white or yellow discharge , and odor .
other form of candidiasis include cutaneous candidiasis ( see mycose of the skin ) and oral thrush ( see microbial diseases of the mouth and oral cavity ) .
although candida spp . be find in the normal microbiota , candida spp .
may also be transmit between individual .
sexual contact be a common mode of transmission , although candidiasis be not consider an sti .
diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis can be make use microscopic evaluation of vaginal secretion to determine whether there be an excess of candida .
culturing approach be less useful because candida be part of the normal microbiota and will regularly appear .
- pron - be also easy to contaminate sample with candida because - pron - be so common , so care must be take to handle clinical material appropriately .
sample can be refrigerate if there be a delay in handling .
candida be a dimorphic fungus , so - pron - do not only exist in a yeast form  cultivation can be use to identify chlamydospore and pseudohyphae , which develop from germ tube ( figure two  three  .  two  two ) .
the presence of the germ tube can be use in a diagnostic test in which culture yeast cell be combine with rabbit serum and observe after a few hour for the presence of germ tube .
molecular test be also available if need .
the affirm vpii microbial identification test , for instance , test simultaneously for the vaginal microbe c . albican , g . vaginalis ( see bacterial infections of the urinary system ) , and trichomonas vaginalis ( see protozoan infections of the urogenital system ) .
topical antifungal medication for vaginal candidiasis include butoconazole , miconazole , clotrimazole , tioconazole , and nystatin .
oral treatment with fluconazole can be use .
there be often no clear precipitating factor for infection , so prevention be difficult .
figure two  three  .  two  one candida blastospore ( asexual spore that result from bud ) and chlamydospore ( rest spore produce through asexual reproduction ) be visible in this micrograph .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
one  zero  three  eight chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  two  two
candida can produce germ tube , like the one in this micrograph , that develop into hypha .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )

what factor can lead to candidiasis ?

how be candidiasi typically diagnose ?
part three
the gram stain of nadia 's vaginal smear show that the concentration of lactobacilli relative to other specie in nadia 's vaginal sample be abnormally low .
however , there be no clue cell visible , which suggest that the infection be not bacterial vaginosis .
but a wet - mount slide show an overgrowth of yeast cell , suggest that the problem be candidiasis , or a yeast infection ( figure two  three  .  two  three ) .
this , nadia 's doctor assure - pron - , be good news .
candidiasis be common during pregnancy and easily treatable .

know that the problem be candidiasi , what treatment may the doctor suggest ?
clinical focus chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  three  nine figure two  three  .  two  three
( a ) lactobacilli be visible as gram - positive rod on and around this squamous epithelial cell .
( b )
this wet mount prepare with koh show candida albican pseudohyphae and squamous epithelial cell in a vaginal sample from a patient with candidiasis .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by mikael häggström )
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
two  three  .  six protozoan infections of the urogenital system learning objectives
 identify the most common protozoan pathogen that cause infection of the reproductive system  summarize the important characteristic of trichomoniasis only one major protozoan specie cause infection in the urogenital system .
trichomoniasis , or “ trich
, " be the most common nonviral sti and be cause by a flagellate protozoan trichomonas vaginalis .
t . vaginalis have an undulating membrane and , generally , an amoeboid shape when attach to cell in the vagina .
in culture , - pron - have an oval shape .
t . vaginalis be commonly find in the normal microbiota of the vagina .
as with other vaginal pathogen , - pron - can cause vaginitis when there be disruption to the normal microbiota .
- pron - be find only as a trophozoite and do not form cyst .
t . vaginalis can adhere to cell use adhesin such as lipoglycan  - pron - also have other cell - surface virulence factor , include tetraspanin that be involve in cell adhesion , motility , and tissue invasion .
in addition , t . vaginalis be capable of phagocytose other microbe of the normal microbiota , contribute to the development of an imbalance that be favorable to infection .
both man and woman can develop trichomoniasis .
man be generally asymptomatic , and although woman be more likely to develop symptom , - pron - be often asymptomatic as well .
when symptom do occur , - pron - be characteristic of urethritis .
man experience itching , irritation , discharge from the penis , and burn after urination or ejaculation .
woman experience dysuria  itch , burning , redness , and soreness of the genitalia  and vaginal discharge .
the infection may also spread to the cervix .
infection increase the risk of transmit or acquire hiv and be associate with pregnancy complication such as preterm birth .
microscopic evaluation of wet mount be an inexpensive and convenient method of diagnosis , but the sensitivity of this method be low ( figure two  three  .  two  four ) .
nucleic acid amplification testing ( naat ) be prefer due to - pron - high sensitivity .
use wet mount and then naat for those who initially test negative be one option to improve sensitivity .
one  zero  four  zero chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five samples may be obtain for naat use urine , vaginal , or endocervical specimen for woman and with urine and urethral swab for man .
- pron - be also possible to use other method such as the osom trichomonas rapid test ( an immunochromatographic test that detect antigen ) and a dna probe test for multiple specie associate with vaginitis ( the affirm vpii microbial identification test discuss in section two  three  .  five  ) . [ one  six ]
t . vaginalis be sometimes detect on a pap test , but this be not consider diagnostic due to high rate of false positive and negative .
the recommend treatment for trichomoniasis be oral metronidazole or tinidazole .
sexual partner should be treat as well .
figure two  three  .  two  four
trichomonas vaginalis be visible in this gram stain speciman .
( credit  modification of work by american society for microbiology )

what be the symptom of trichomoniasis ?
stis and privacy for many sti , - pron - be common to contact and treat sexual partner of the patient .
this be especially important when a new illness have appear , as when hiv become more prevalent in the one  nine  eight  zero s .
but to contact sexual partner , - pron - be necessary to obtain - pron - personal information from the patient .
this raise difficult question .
in some case , provide the information may be embarrassing or difficult for the patient , even though withhold such information could put - pron - sexual partner ( s ) at risk .
legal consideration further complicate such situation .
the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hippa ) , pass into law in one  nine  nine  six , set the standard for the protection of patient information .
- pron - require business that use health information , such as insurance company and healthcare provider , to maintain strict confidentiality of patient record .
contact a patient 's sexual partner may therefore violate the patient 's privacy right if the patient 's diagnosis be reveal as a result .
eye on ethics one  six .
association of public health laboratories .
"
advance in laboratory detection of trichomonas vaginalis , " two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . aphl . org /
aboutaphl / publication / document / id_ two  zero  one  three august_advance - in - laboratory - detection - of - trichomonas - vaginalis . pdf .
chapter two  three
 urogenital system infections one  zero  four  one from an ethical standpoint , which be more important  the patient 's privacy right or the sexual partner 's right to know that - pron - may be at risk of a sexually transmit disease ?
do the answer depend on the severity of the disease or be the rule universal ?
suppose the physician know the identity of the sexual partner but the patient do not want that individual to be contact .
would - pron - be a violation of hippa rule to contact the individual without the patient 's consent ?
question related to patient privacy become even more complicated when deal with patient who be minor .
adolescent may be reluctant to discuss - pron - sexual behavior or health with a health professional , especially if - pron - believe that healthcare professional will tell - pron - parent .
this leave many teen at risk of have an untreated infection or of lack the information to protect - pron - and - pron - partner .
on the other hand , parent may feel that - pron - have a right to know what be go on with - pron - child .
how should physician handle this ?
should parent always be tell even if the adolescent want confidentiality ?
do this affect how the physician should handle notify a sexual partner ?
resolution vaginal candidiasis be generally treat use topical antifungal medication such as butoconazole , miconazole , clotrimazole , ticonozole , nystatin , or oral fluconazole .
however , - pron - be important to be careful in select a treatment for use during pregnancy .
nadia 's doctor recommend treatment with topical clotrimazole .
this drug be classify as a category b drug by the fda for use in pregnancy , and there appear to be no evidence of harm , at least in the second or third trimester of pregnancy .
base on nadia 's particular situation , - pron - doctor think that - pron - be suitable for very short - term use even though - pron - be still in the first trimester .
after a seven - day course of treatment , nadia 's yeast infection clear .
- pron - continue with a normal pregnancy and deliver a healthy baby eight month later .
high level of hormone during pregnancy can shift the typical microbiota composition and balance in the vagina , lead to high rate of infection such as candidiasis or vaginosis .
topical treatment have an eight  zero – nine  zero % success rate , with only a small number of case result in recurrent or persistent infection .
long term or intermittent treatment be usually effective in these case .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
fungal and protozoan reproductive tract infections figure two  three  .  two  five summarize the most important feature of candidiasis and trichomoniasis .
clinical focus disease profile one  zero  four  two chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  three  .  two  five
take an online quiz ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two quizstireview ) for a review of sexually transmit infection .
summary two  three  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the urogenital tract

the urinary system be responsible for filter the blood , excrete waste , and help to regulate electrolyte and water balance .

the urinary system include the kidney , ureter , urinary bladder , and urethra  the bladder and urethra be the most common site of infection .

common site of infection in the male reproductive system include the urethra , as well as the testis , prostate and epididymis .

the most common site of infection in the female reproductive system be the vulva , vagina , cervix , and link to learn chapter two  three

urogenital system infections one  zero  four  three fallopian tube .

infections of the urogenital tract can occur through colonization from the external environment , alteration in microbiota due to hormonal or other physiological and environmental change , fecal contamination , and sexual transmission ( sti ) .
two  three  .  two bacterial infections of the urinary system 
bacterial cystitis be commonly cause by fecal bacteria such as e . coli .

pyelonephritis be a serious kidney infection that be often cause by bacteria that travel from infection elsewhere in the urinary tract and may cause systemic complication .

leptospirosis be a bacterial infection of the kidney that can be transmit by exposure to infect animal urine , especially in contaminated water .
- pron - be more common in tropical than in temperate climate .

nongonococcal urethritis ( ngu ) be commonly cause by c . trachomatis , m . genitalium , ureaplasma urealyticum , and m . homini .

diagnosis and treatment for bacterial urinary tract infection varie .
urinalysis ( e . g . , for leukocyte esterase level , nitrite level , microscopic evaluation , and culture of urine ) be an important component in most case .
broad - spectrum antibiotic be typically use .
two  three  .  three bacterial infections of the reproductive system

bacterial vaginosis be cause by an imbalance in the vaginal microbiota , with a decrease in lactobacilli and an increase in vaginal ph . g . vaginalis be the most common cause of bacterial vaginosis , which be associate with vaginal discharge , odor , burning , and itch .

gonorrhea be cause by n . gonorrhoeae , which can cause infection of the reproductive and urinary tract and be associate with symptom of urethritis .
if leave untreated , - pron - can progress to epididymitis , salpingitis , and pelvic inflammatory disease and enter the bloodstream to infect other site in the body .

chlamydia be the most commonly report sti and be cause by c . trachomatis .
most infection be asymptomatic , and infection that be not treat can spread to involve the epididymis of man and cause salpingitis and pelvic inflammatory disease in woman .

syphilis be cause by t . pallidum and have three stage , primary , secondary , and tertiary .
primary syphilis be associate with a painless hard chancre lesion on genitalia .
secondary syphilis be associate with skin and mucous membrane lesion .
tertiary syphilis be the most serious and life - threaten , and can involve serious nervous system damage .

chancroid be an infection of the reproductive tract cause by h . ducreyi that result in the development of characteristic soft chancre .
two  three  .  four viral infections of the reproductive system
 genital herpe be usually cause by hsv -  two ( although hsv -  one can also be responsible ) and may cause the development of infectious , potentially recurrent vesicle  neonatal herpe can occur in baby bear to infect mother and can cause symptom that range from relatively mild ( more common ) to severe .

human papillomaviruse be the most common sexually transmit virus and include strain that cause genital wart as well as strain that cause cervical cancer .
two  three  .  five fungal infections of the reproductive system 
candida spp . be typically present in the normal microbiota in the body , include the skin , respiratory tract , gastrointestinal tract , and female urogenital system .

disruption in the normal vaginal microbiota can lead to an overgrowth of candida , cause vaginal candidiasis .
 vaginal candidiasis can be treat with topical or oral fungicide .
prevention be difficult .
two  three  .  six protozoan infections of the urogenital system

trichomoniasis be a common sti cause by trichomonas vaginalis .
one  zero  four  four chapter two  three

urogenital system infection
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
t . vaginalis be common at low level in the normal microbiota .

trichomoniasis be often asymptomatic .
when symptom develop , trichomoniasis cause urinary discomfort , irritation , itching , burning , discharge from the penis ( in man ) , and vaginal discharge ( in woman ) .
trichomoniasis be treat with the antiflagellate drug tinidazole and metronidazole .
chapter two  four digestive system infections figure
two  four  .  one e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven cause serious foodborne illness .
curli fiber ( adhesive surface fiber that be part of the extracellular matrix ) help these bacteria adhere to surface and form biofilm .
picture be two group of cell , curli non - producing cell ( leave ) and curli produce cell ( right ) .
( credit leave , right 
modification of work by usda ) chapter outline two  four  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the digestive system two  four  .  two microbial diseases of the mouth and oral cavity two  four  .  three bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract
two  four  .  four viral infections of the gastrointestinal tract
two  four  .  five protozoan infections of the gastrointestinal tract
two  four  .  six helminthic infections of the gastrointestinal tract introduction gastrointestinal ( gi ) disease be so common that , unfortunately , most people have have first - hand experience with the unpleasant symptom , such as diarrhea , vomiting , and abdominal discomfort .
the cause of gastrointestinal illness can vary widely , but such disease can be group into two category  those cause by infection ( the growth of a pathogen in the gi tract ) or intoxication ( the presence of a microbial toxin in the gi tract ) .
foodborne pathogen like escherichia coli o one  five  seven  h seven be among the most common source of gastrointestinal disease .
contaminate food and water have always pose a health risk for human , but in today 's global economy , outbreak can occur on a much large scale .
e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven be a potentially deadly strain of e . coli with a history of contaminate meat and produce that be not properly process .
the source of an e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven outbreak can be difficult to trace , especially if the contaminate food be process in a foreign country .
once the source be identify , authority may issue recall of the contaminate food product , but by then there be typically numerous case of food poisoning , some of - pron - fatal .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  four  nine
two  four  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of
the digestive system learning objectives
 describe the major anatomical feature of the human digestive system 
describe the normal microbiota of various region in the human digestive system

explain how microorganism overcome the defense of the digestive tract to cause infection or intoxication 
describe general sign and symptom associate with infection of the digestive system the human digestive system , or the gastrointestinal ( gi ) tract , begin with the mouth and end with the anus .
the part of the mouth include the tooth , the gum , the tongue , the oral vestibule ( the space between the gum , lip , and tooth ) , and the oral cavity proper ( the space behind the tooth and gum ) .
other part of the gi tract be the pharynx , esophagus , stomach , small intestine , large intestine , rectum , and anus ( figure two  four  .  two ) .
accessory digestive organ include the salivary gland , liver , gallbladder , spleen , and pancrea .
the digestive system contain normal microbiota , include archaea , bacteria , fungus , protist , and even virus .
because this microbiota be important for normal functioning of the digestive system , alteration to the microbiota by antibiotic or diet can be harmful .
additionally , the introduction of pathogen to the gi tract can cause infection and disease .
in this section , - pron - will review the microbiota find in a healthy digestive tract and the general sign and symptom associate with oral and gi infection .
part one
after a morning of play outside , four - year - old carli run inside for lunch .
after take a bite of - pron - fry egg , - pron - push - pron - away and whine , “
- pron - ' too slimy , mommy . i do not want any more .
"
but - pron - mother , in no mood for game , curtly reply that if - pron - want to go back outside - pron - have well finish - pron - lunch .
reluctantly , carli comply , try hard not to gag as - pron - choke down the runny egg .
that night , carli wake up feeling nauseate .
- pron - cry for - pron - parent and then begin to vomit .
- pron - parent try to comfort - pron - , but - pron - continue to vomit all night and begin to have diarrhea and run a fever .
by the morning , - pron - parent be very worried .
- pron - rush - pron - to the emergency room .

what could have cause carli 's sign and symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  zero  five  zero chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two the digestive system , or the gastrointestinal tract , include all of the organ associate with the digestion of food .
anatomy and normal microbiota of the oral cavity food enter the digestive tract through the mouth , where mechanical digestion ( by chew ) and chemical digestion ( by enzyme in saliva ) begin .
within the mouth be the tongue , tooth , and salivary gland , include the parotid , sublingual , and submandibular gland ( figure two  four  .  three ) .
the salivary gland produce saliva , which lubricate food and contain digestive enzyme .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  five  one figure two  four  .  three ( a )
when food enter the mouth , digestion begin .
( b ) salivary gland be accessory digestive organ .
( credit  modification of work by national cancer institute )
the structure of a tooth ( figure two  four  .  four ) begin with the visible outer surface , call the crown , which have to be extremely hard to withstand the force of bite and chewing .
the crown be cover with enamel , which be the hard material in the body .
underneath the crown , a layer of relatively hard dentin extend into the root of the tooth around the innermost pulp cavity , which include the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal , or root canal , locate in the root .
the pulp that fill the pulp cavity be rich in blood vessel , lymphatic vessel , connective tissue , and nerve .
the root of the tooth and some of the crown be cover with cementum , which work with the periodontal ligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone .
the soft tissue surround the tooth and bone be call gum , or gingiva .
the gingival space or gingival crevice be locate between the gum and tooth .
figure two  four  .  four
the tooth have a visible crown with an outer layer of enamel , a layer of dentin , and an inner pulp .
the root , hide by the gum , contain the pulp canal ( root canal ) .
( credit  modification of work by bruce blaus )
microbes such as bacteria and archaea be abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surface of the oral cavity .
however , different structure , such as the tooth or cheek , host unique community of both aerobic and anaerobic one  zero  five  two chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five microbe .
some factor appear to work against make the mouth hospitable to certain microbe .
for example , chew allow microbe to mix better with saliva so - pron - can be swallow or spit out more easily .
saliva also contain enzyme , include lysozyme , which can damage microbial cell .
recall that lysozyme be part of the first line of defense in the innate immune system and cleave the β - (  one  ,  four ) glycosidic linkage between n - acetylglucosamine ( nag ) and n - acetylmuramic acid ( nam ) in bacterial peptidoglycan ( see chemical defenses ) .
additionally , fluid contain immunoglobulin and phagocytic cell be produce in the gingival space .
despite all of these chemical and mechanical activity , the mouth support a large microbial community .

what factor make the mouth inhospitable for certain microbe ?
anatomy and normal microbiota of the gi tract
as food leave the oral cavity , - pron - travel through the pharynx , or the back of the throat , and move into the esophagus , which carry the food from the pharynx to the stomach without add any additional digestive enzyme .
the stomach produce mucus to protect - pron - lining , as well as digestive enzyme and acid to break down food .
partially digested food then leave the stomach through the pyloric sphincter , reach the first part of the small intestine call the duodenum .
pancreatic juice , which include enzyme and bicarbonate ion , be release into the small intestine to neutralize the acidic material from the stomach and to assist in digestion .
bile , produce by the liver but store in the gallbladder , be also release into the small intestine to emulsify fat so that - pron - can travel in the watery environment of the small intestine .
digestion continue in the small intestine , where the majority of nutrient contain in the food be absorb .
simple columnar epithelial cell call enterocyte line the lumen surface of the small intestinal fold call villi .
each enterocyte have small microvilli ( cytoplasmic membrane extension ) on the cellular apical surface that increase the surface area to allow more absorption of nutrient to occur ( figure two  four  .  five ) .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  five  three figure two  four  .  five ( a )
the structure of the wall of the small intestine allow for the majority of nutrient absorption in the body .
( b ) villi be fold in the surface of the small intestine .
microvilli be cytoplasmic extension on individual cell that increase the surface area for absorption .
( c )
a light micrograph show the shape of the villi .
( d )
an electron micrograph show the shape of the microvilli .
( credit b , c , d 
modification of micrograph provide by the regents of university of michigan medical school © two  zero  one  two )
digest food leave the small intestine and move into the large intestine , or colon , where there be a more diverse microbiota .
near this junction , there be a small pouch in the large intestine call the cecum , which attach to the appendix .
further digestion occur throughout the colon and water be reabsorb , then waste be excrete through the rectum , the last section of the colon , and out of the body through the anus ( figure two  four  .  two ) .
the environment of most of the gi tract be harsh , which serve two purpose  digestion and immunity .
the stomach be an extremely acidic environment ( ph one  .  five – three  .  five ) due to the gastric juice that break down food and kill many ingested microbe  this help prevent infection from pathogen .
the environment in the small intestine be less harsh and be able to support microbial community .
microorganism present in the small intestine can include lactobacilli , diptherioid and the fungus candida .
on the other hand , the large intestine ( colon ) contain a diverse and abundant microbiota that be important for normal function .
these microbe include bacteriodetes ( especially the genera bacteroides and prevotella ) and firmicutes ( especially member of the genus clostridium ) .
methanogenic archaea and some fungi be also present , among many other specie of bacteria .
these microbe all aid in digestion and contribute to the production of fece , the waste excrete from the digestive tract , and flatus , the gas produce from microbial fermentation of undigested food .
- pron - can also produce valuable nutrient .
for example , lactic acid bacteria such as one  zero  five  four chapter two  four  digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five bifidobacteria can synthesize vitamin , such as vitamin b one  two , folate , and riboflavin , that human can not synthesize - pron - .
e . coli find in the intestine can also break down food and help the body produce vitamin k , which be important for blood coagulation .
the gi tract have several other method of reduce the risk of infection by pathogen .
small aggregate of underlying lymphoid tissue in the ileum , call peyer 's patch ( figure two  four  .  five ) , detect pathogen in the intestine via microfold ( m ) cell , which transfer antigen from the luman of the intestine to the lymphocyte on peyer 's patch to induce an immune response .
the peyer 's patch then secrete iga and other pathogen - specific antibody into the intestinal luman to help keep intestinal microbe at safe level .
goblet cell , which be modify simple columnar epithelial cell , also line the gi tract ( figure two  four  .  six ) .
goblet cell secrete a gel - form mucin , which be the major component of mucus .
the production of a protective layer of mucus help reduce the risk of pathogen reach deep tissue .
the constant movement of material through the gastrointestinal tract also help to move transient pathogen out of the body .
in fact , fece be compose of approximately two  five % microbe , two  five % slough epithelial cell , two  five % mucus , and two  five % digested or undigested food .
finally , the normal microbiota provide an additional barrier to infection via a variety of mechanism .
for example , these organism outcompete potential pathogen for space and nutrient within the intestine .
this be know as competitive exclusion .
member of the microbiota may also secrete protein toxin know as bacteriocin that be able to bind to specific receptor on the surface of susceptible bacteria .
figure two  four  .  six
a magnify image of intestinal villi in the gi tract show goblet cell .
these cell be important in produce a protective layer of mucus .

compare and contrast the microbiota of the small and large intestine .
general signs and symptoms of oral and gi disease despite numerous defense mechanism that protect against infection , all part of the digestive tract can become site of infection or intoxication .
the term food poisoning be sometimes use as a catch - all for gi infection and intoxication , but not all form of gi disease originate with foodborne pathogen or toxin .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  five  five
in the mouth , fermentation by anaerobic microbe produce acid that damage the tooth and gum .
this can lead to tooth decay , cavity , and periodontal disease , a condition characterize by chronic inflammation and erosion of the gum .
additionally , some pathogen can cause infection of the mucosa , gland , and other structure in the mouth , result in inflammation , sore , canker , and other lesion .
an open sore in the mouth or gi tract be typically call an ulcer .
infection and intoxication of the low gi tract often produce symptom such as nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , ache , and fever .
in some case , vomiting and diarrhea may cause severe dehydration and other complication that can become serious or fatal .
various clinical term be use to describe gastrointestinal symptom .
for example , gastritis be an inflammation of the stomach line that result in swelling and enteritis refer to inflammation of the intestinal mucosa .
when the inflammation involve both the stomach lining and the intestinal lining , the condition be call gastroenteritis .
inflammation of the liver be call hepatitis .
inflammation of the colon , call colitis , commonly occur in case of food intoxication .
because an inflamed colon do not reabsorb water as effectively as - pron - normally do , stool become watery , cause diarrhea .
damage to the epithelial cell of the colon can also cause bleed and excess mucus to appear in watery stool , a condition call dysentery .

list possible cause and sign and symptom of food poisoning .
two  four  .  two microbial diseases of the mouth and oral cavity
learning objectives

explain the role of microbial activity in disease of the mouth and oral cavity  compare the major characteristic of specific oral disease and infection despite the presence of saliva and the mechanical force of chew and eating , some microbe thrive in the mouth .
these microbe can cause damage to the tooth and can cause infection that have the potential to spread beyond the mouth and sometimes throughout the body .
dental caries cavity of the tooth , know clinically as dental carie , be microbial lesion that cause damage to the tooth .
over time , the lesion can grow through the outer enamel layer to infect the underlie dentin or even the innermost pulp .
if dental carie be not treat , the infection can become an abscess that spread to the deep tissue of the tooth , near the root , or to the bloodstream .
tooth decay result from the metabolic activity of microbe that live on the tooth .
a layer of protein and carbohydrate form when clean tooth come into contact with saliva .
microbe be attract to this food source and form a biofilm call plaque .
the most important cariogenic specie in these biofilm be streptococcus mutan .
when sucrose , a disaccharide sugar from food , be break down by bacteria in the mouth , glucose and fructose be produce .
the glucose be use to make dextran , which be part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm .
fructose be ferment , produce organic acid such as lactic acid .
these acid dissolve the mineral of the tooth , include enamel , even though - pron - be the hard material in the body .
the acid work even more quickly on expose dentin ( figure two  four  .  seven ) .
over time , the plaque biofilm can become thick and eventually calcify .
when a heavy plaque deposit become harden in this way , - pron - be call tartar or dental calculus
( figure two  four  .  eight ) .
these substantial plaque biofilm can include a variety of bacterial specie , include streptococcus and actinomyces specie .
one  zero  five  six chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  seven tooth decay occur in stage .
when bacterial biofilm ( plaque ) develop on tooth , the acid produce gradually dissolve the enamel , follow by the dentin .
eventually , if leave untreated , the lesion may reach the pulp and cause an abscess .
( credit  modification of work by “ bruceblaus” / wikimedia commons
) figure two  four  .  eight ( a ) tartar ( dental calculus ) be visible at the basis of these tooth .
the darker deposit higher on the crown be stain .
( b )
this tooth show only a small amount of visible decay .
( c )
an x - ray of the same tooth show that there be a dark area represent more decay inside the tooth .
( d )
removal of a portion of the crown reveal the area of damage .
( e ) all of the cavity must be remove before fill .
( credit  modification of work by “ drosenbach” / wikimedia commons )
some tooth decay be visible from the outside , but - pron - be not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay .
chapter two  four

digestive system infections one  zero  five  seven x - ray imaging be use to produce radiograph that can be study to look for deep decay and damage to the root or bone ( figure two  four  .  eight ) .
if not detect , the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream .
painful abscess can develop .
to prevent tooth decay , prophylactic treatment and good hygiene be important .
regular tooth brush and floss physically remove microbe and combat microbial growth and biofilm formation .
toothpaste contain fluoride , which become incorporate into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel , protect - pron - against acidity cause by fermentation of mouth microbiota .
fluoride be also bacteriostatic , thus slow enamel degradation .
antiseptic mouthwash commonly contain plant - derive phenolic like thymol and eucalyptol and / or heavy metal like zinc chloride ( see use chemical to control microorganisms ) .
phenolic tend to be stable and persistent on surface , and - pron - act through denature protein and disrupt membrane .
regular dental cleaning allow for the detection of decay at early stage and the removal of tartar .
- pron - may also help to draw attention to other concern , such as damage to the enamel from acidic drink .
reduce sugar consumption may help prevent damage that result from the microbial fermentation of sugar .
additionally , sugarless candy or gum with sugar alcohol ( such as xylitol ) can reduce the production of acid because these be ferment to nonacidic compound ( although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress ) .
fluoride treatment or ingest fluoridated water strengthen the mineral in tooth and reduce the incidence of dental carie .
if carie develop , prompt treatment prevent worsen .
small area of decay can be drill to remove affect tissue and then fill .
if the pulp be affect , then a root canal may be need to completely remove the infect tissue to avoid continue spread of the infection , which could lead to painful abscess .

name some way that microbe contribute to tooth decay .

what be the most important cariogenic specie of bacteria ?
periodontal disease
in addition to damage to the tooth - pron - , the surround structure can be affect by microbe .
periodontal disease be the result of infection that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structure surround the tooth .
the progression from mild to severe periodontal disease be generally reversible and preventable with good oral hygiene .
inflammation of the gum that can lead to irritation and bleeding be call gingivitis .
when plaque accumulate on the tooth , bacteria colonize the gingival space .
as this space become increasingly block , the environment become anaerobic .
this allow a wide variety of microbe to colonize , include porphyromonas , streptococcus , and actinomyces .
the bacterial product , which include lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) , protease , lipoteichoic acid , and other , cause inflammation and gum damage ( figure two  four  .  nine ) .
- pron - be possible that methanogenic archaean ( include methanobrevibacter oralis and other methanobrevibacter specie ) also contribute to disease progression as some specie have be identify in patient with periodontal disease , but this have prove difficult to study . [ one ][ two ][ three ]
gingivitis be diagnose by visual inspection , include measure pocket in the gum , and x - ray , and be usually treat use good dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning , with antibiotic reserve for severe case .
one .
hans - peter horz and georg conrads .
“
methanogenic archaea and oral infections
- ways to unravel the black box .
” journal of oral microbiology three  (  two  zero  one  one ) .
doi 
one  zero  .  three  four  zero  two  / jom . v three i zero  .  five  nine  four  zero .
two .
hiroshi maeda , kimito hirai , junji mineshiba , tadashi yamamoto , susumu kokeguchi , and shogo takashiba .
" medical microbiological approach to archaea in oral infectious diseases .
"
japanese dental science review four  nine  two , p .
seven  two – seven  eight .
three .
paul w . lepp , mary m . brinig , cleber c . ouverney , katherine palm , gary c . armitage , and david a . relman .
“
methanogenic archaea and human periodontal disease .
”
proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america one  zero  one ( two  zero  zero  three )  one  six , pp .
six  one  seven  six – six  one  eight  one .
doi  one  zero  .  one  zero  seven  three  / pnas .  zero  three  zero  eight  seven  six  six  one  zero  one .
one  zero  five  eight chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  nine redness and irritation of the gum be evidence of gingivitis .
over time , chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of periodontitis ( figure two  four  .  one  zero ) .
when this happen , the gums recede and expose part of the tooth below the crown .
this newly expose area be relatively unprotected , so bacteria can grow on - pron - and spread underneath the enamel of the crown and cause cavity .
bacteria in the gingival space can also erode the cementum , which help to hold the tooth in place .
if not treat , erosion of cementum can lead to the movement or loss of tooth .
the bone of the jaw can even erode if the infection spread .
this condition can be associate with bleeding and halitosis ( bad breath ) .
cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene may be sufficient to treat periodontitis .
however , in case of severe periodontitis , an antibiotic may be give .
antibiotic may be give in pill form or apply directly to the gum ( local treatment ) .
antibiotic give can include tetracycline , doxycycline , macrolide or β - lactam .
because periodontitis can be cause by a mix of microbe , a combination of antibiotic may be give .
figure two  four  .  one  zero ( a ) healthy gum hold the tooth firmly and do not bleed .
( b ) gingivitis be the first stage of periodontal disease .
microbial infection cause gum to become inflamed and irritated , with occasional bleeding .
( c )
in periodontitis , gum recede and expose part of the tooth normally cover .
( d )
in advanced periodontitis , the infection spread to ligament and bone tissue support the tooth .
tooth loss may occur , or tooth may need to be surgically remove .
( credit  modification of work by “ bruceblaus” / wikimedia commons )
trench mouth
when certain bacteria , such as prevotella intermedia , fusobacterium specie , and treponema vicentii , be involved and periodontal disease progress , acute necrotize ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth , also call vincent ' s disease , can develop .
this be severe periodontitis characterize by erosion of the gum , ulcer , substantial pain with chewing , and halitosis ( figure two  four  .  one  one ) that can be diagnose by visual examination and x - ray .
in country with good medical and dental care , - pron - be most common in individual with weaken immune system , such as patient with aids .
in addition to cleaning and pain medication , patient may be prescribe antibiotic such as amoxicillin , chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  five  nine amoxicillin clavulanate , clindamycin , or doxycycline .
figure two  four  .  one  one
these inflamed , eroded gum be an example of a mild case of acute necrotize ulcerative gingivitis , also know as trench mouth .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

how do gingivitis progress to periodontitis ?
healthy mouth , healthy body good oral health promote good overall health , and the reverse be also true .
poor oral health can lead to difficulty eat , which can cause malnutrition .
painful or loose tooth can also cause a person to avoid certain food or eat less .
malnutrition due to dental problem be of great concern for the elderly , for whom - pron - can worsen other health condition and contribute to mortality .
individual who have serious illness , especially aids , be also at increase risk of malnutrition from dental problem .
additionally , poor oral health can contribute to the development of disease .
increase bacterial growth in the mouth can cause inflammation and infection in other part of the body .
for example , streptococcus in the mouth , the main contributor to biofilm on tooth , tartar , and dental carie , can spread throughout the body when there be damage to the tissue inside the mouth , as can happen during dental work .
s . mutan produce a surface adhesin know as p one , which bind to salivary agglutinin on the surface of the tooth .
p one can also bind to extracellular matrix protein include fibronectin and collagen .
when streptococcus enter the bloodstream as a result of tooth brushing or dental cleaning , - pron - cause inflammation that can lead to the accumulation of plaque in the artery and contribute to the development of atherosclerosis , a condition associate with cardiovascular disease , heart attack , and stroke .
in some case , bacteria that spread through the blood vessel can lodge in the heart and cause endocarditis ( an example of a focal infection ) .
micro connections one  zero  six  zero chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five oral infections
as note earlier , normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infection .
however , there be number of other infection that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbe be present .
herpetic gingivostomatitis
as describe in viral infections of the skin and eyes , infection by herpe simplex virus type one ( hsv -  one ) frequently manifest as oral herpe , also call acute herpe labialis and characterize by cold sore on the lip , mouth , or gum .
hsv -  one can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis , a condition that result in ulcer of the mucous membrane inside the mouth ( figure two  four  .  one  two ) .
herpetic gingivostomatitis be normally self - limit except in immunocompromised patient .
like oral herpe , the infection be generally diagnose through clinical examination , but culture or biopsy may be obtain if other sign or symptom suggest the possibility of a different causative agent .
if treatment be need , mouthwash or antiviral medication such as acyclovir , famciclovir , or valacyclovir may be use .
figure two  four  .  one  two ( a )
this cold sore be cause by infection with herpe simplex virus type one ( hsv -  one ) .
( b ) hsv -  one can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis .
( credit b  modification of work by klaus d . peter )
oral thrush
the yeast candida be part of the normal human microbiota , but overgrowth , especially of candida albican , can lead to infection in several part of the body .
when candida infection develop in the oral cavity , - pron - be call oral thrush .
oral thrush be most common in infant because - pron - do not yet have well develop immune system and have not acquire the robust normal microbiota that keep candida in check in adult .
oral thrush be also common in immunodeficient patient and be a common infection in patient with aids .
oral thrush be characterize by the appearance of white patch and pseudomembrane in the mouth ( figure two  four  .  one  three ) and can be associate with bleed .
the infection may be treat topically with nystatin or clotrimazole oral suspension , although systemic treatment be sometimes need .
in serious case , systemic azole such as fluconazole or itraconazole ( for strain resistant to fluconazole ) , may be use .
amphotericin b can also be use if the infection be severe or if the candida specie be azole - resistant .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  six  one figure two  four  .  one  three overgrowth of candida in the mouth be call thrush .
- pron - often appear as white patch .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
mump
the viral disease mump be an infection of the parotid gland , the large of the three pair of salivary gland ( figure two  four  .  three ) .
the causative agent be mump virus ( muv ) , a paramyxovirus with an envelope that have hemagglutinin and neuraminidase spike .
a fusion protein locate on the surface of the envelope help to fuse the viral envelope to the host cell plasma membrane .
mump virus be transmit through respiratory droplet or through contact with contaminate saliva , make - pron - quite contagious so that - pron - can lead easily to epidemic .
- pron - cause fever , muscle pain , headache , pain with chew , loss of appetite , fatigue , and weakness .
there be swell of the salivary gland and associate pain ( figure two  four  .  one  four ) .
the virus can enter the bloodstream ( viremia ) , allow - pron - to spread to the organ and the central nervous system .
the infection range from subclinical case to case with serious complication , such as encephalitis , meningitis , and deafness .
inflammation of the pancrea , testis , ovary , and breast may also occur and cause permanent damage to those organ  despite these complication , a mump infection rarely cause sterility .
mump can be recognize base on clinical sign and symptom , and a diagnosis can be confirm with laboratory testing .
the virus can be identify use culture or molecular technique such as rt - pcr .
serologic test be also available , especially enzyme immunoassay that detect antibody .
there be no specific treatment for mump , so supportive therapy be use .
the most effective way to avoid infection be through vaccination .
although mump use to be a common childhood disease , - pron - be now rare in the united states due to vaccination with the measle , mump , and rubella ( mmr ) vaccine .
one  zero  six  two chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  one  four
this child show the characteristic parotid swelling associate with mump .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

compare and contrast the sign and symptom of herpetic gingivostomatitis , oral thrush , and mump .
oral infections infections of the mouth and oral cavity can be cause by a variety of pathogen , include bacteria , virus , and fungi .
many of these infection only affect the mouth , but some can spread and become systemic infection .
figure two  four  .  one  five summarize the main characteristic of common oral infection .
disease profile chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  six  three figure two  four  .  one  five one  zero  six  four chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  four  .  three bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract learning objectives
 identify the most common bacteria that can cause infection of the gi tract

compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the gi
tract
a wide range of gastrointestinal disease be cause by bacterial contamination of food .
recall that foodborne disease can arise from either infection or intoxication .
in both case , bacterial toxin be typically responsible for produce disease sign and symptom .
the distinction lie in where the toxin be produce .
in an infection , the microbial agent be ingest , colonize the gut , and then produce toxin that damage host cell .
in an intoxication , bacteria produce toxin in the food before - pron - be ingest .
in either case , the toxin cause damage to the cell line the gastrointestinal tract , typically the colon .
this lead to the common sign and symptom of diarrhea or watery stool and abdominal cramp , or the more severe dysentery .
symptom of foodborne disease also often include nausea and vomiting , which be mechanism the body use to expel the toxic material .
most bacterial gastrointestinal illness be short - lived and self - limit  however , loss of fluid due to severe diarrheal illness can lead to dehydration that can , in some case , be fatal without proper treatment .
oral rehydration therapy with electrolyte solution be an essential aspect of treatment for most patient with gi disease , especially in child and infant .
staphylococcal food poisoning staphylococcal food poisoning be one form of food intoxication .
when staphylococcus aureus grow in food , - pron - may produce enterotoxin that , when ingest , can cause symptom such as nausea , diarrhea , cramping , and vomit within one to six hour .
in some severe case , - pron - may cause headache , dehydration , and change in blood pressure and heart rate .
sign and symptom resolve within two  four to four  eight hour .
s . aureus be often associate with a variety of raw or undercooked and cooked food include meat ( e . g . , canned meat , ham , and sausage ) and dairy product ( e . g . , cheese , milk , and butter ) .
- pron - be also commonly find on hand and can be transmit to prepare food through poor hygiene , include poor handwashing and the use of contaminate food preparation surface , such as cut board .
the great risk be for food leave at a temperature below six  zero ° c ( one  four  zero ° f ) , which allow the bacteria to grow .
cooked food should generally be reheat to at least six  zero ° c ( one  four  zero ° f ) for safety and most raw meat should be cook to even high internal temperature ( figure two  four  .  one  six ) .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  six  five figure two  four  .  one  six
this figure indicate safe internal temperature associate with the refrigeration , cooking , and reheat of different food .
temperature above refrigeration and below the minimum cooking temperature may allow for microbial growth , increase the likelihood of foodborne disease .
( credit  modification of work by usda )
there be at least two  one staphylococcal enterotoxin and staphylococcal enterotoxin - like toxin that can cause food intoxication .
the enterotoxin be protein that be resistant to low ph , allow - pron - to pass through the stomach .
- pron - be heat stable and be not destroy by boil at one  zero  zero ° c .
even though the bacterium - pron - may be kill , the enterotoxin alone can cause vomiting and diarrhea , although the mechanism be not fully understand .
at least some of the symptom may be cause by the enterotoxin function as a superantigen and provoke a strong immune response by activate t cell proliferation .
the rapid onset of sign and symptom help to diagnose this foodborne illness .
because the bacterium do not need to be present for the toxin to cause symptom , diagnosis be confirm by identify the toxin in a food sample or in biological specimen ( fece or vomitus ) from the patient .
serological technique , include elisa , can also be use to identify the toxin in food sample .
the condition generally resolve relatively quickly , within two  four hour , without treatment .
in some case , supportive treatment in a hospital may be need .

how can s . aureus cause food intoxication ?
shigellosis ( bacillary dysentery )
when gastrointestinal illness be associate with the rod - shape , gram - negative bacterium shigella , - pron - be call bacillary dysentery , or shigellosis .
infection can be cause by s . dysenteriae , s . flexneri , s . boydii , and / or s . sonnei that colonize the gi tract .
shigellosis can be spread from hand to mouth or through contaminate food and water .
most commonly , - pron - be transmit through the fecal - oral route .
shigella bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cell .
when take into a phagosome , - pron - can escape and then live within the cytoplasm of the cell or move to adjacent cell .
as the organism multiply , the epithelium and structure with m cell of the peyer 's patch in the intestine may become ulcerated and cause loss of fluid .
stomach cramp , fever , and watery diarrhea that may also contain pus , mucus , and / or blood often develop .
more severe case may result in ulceration of the mucosa , dehydration , and rectal bleeding .
additionally , patient may later develop hemolytic uremic one  zero  six  six chapter two  four  digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five syndrome ( hus ) , a serious condition in which damage blood cell build up in the kidney and may cause kidney failure , or reactive arthritis , a condition in which arthritis develop in multiple joint follow infection .
patient may also develop chronic post - infection irritable bowel syndrome ( ibs ) .
s . dysenteriae type one be able to produce shiga toxin , which target the endothelial cell of small blood vessel in the small and large intestine by bind to a glycosphingolipid .
once inside the endothelial cell , the toxin target the large ribosomal subunit , thus affect protein synthesis of these cell .
hemorrhaging and lesion in the colon can result .
the toxin can target the kidney 's glomerulus , the blood vessel where filtration of blood in the kidney begin , thus result in hus .
stool sample , which should be process promptly , be analyze use serological or molecular technique .
one common method be to perform immunoassay for s . dysenteriae .
( other method that can be use to identify shigella include api test strip , enterotube system , or pcr testing .
the presence of white blood cell and blood in fecal sample occur in about seven  zero % of patients[ four ] ( figure two  four  .  one  seven ) .
severe case may require antibiotic such as ciprofloxacin and azithromycin , but these must be carefully prescribe because resistance be increasingly common .
figure two  four  .  one  seven red and white blood cell can be see in this micrograph of a stool sample from a patient with shigellosis .

compare and contrast shigella infection and intoxication .
salmonellosis salmonella gastroenteritis , also call salmonellosis , be cause by the rod - shape , gram - negative bacterium salmonella .
two specie , s . enterica and s . bongori , cause disease in human , but s . enterica be the most common .
the most common serotype of s . enterica be enteritidis and typhi .
- pron - will discuss typhoid fever cause by serotype typhi and paratyphi a separately .
here , - pron - will focus on salmonellosis cause by other serotype .
salmonella be a part of the normal intestinal microbiota of many individual .
however , salmonellosis be cause by exogenous agent , and infection can occur depend on the serotype , size of the inoculum , and overall health of the four .
jaya sureshbabu .
“ shigella infection workup .
”
medscape .
update jun two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article / nine  six  eight  seven  seven  three  - workup .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  six  seven host .
infection be cause by ingestion of contaminate food , handling of eggshell , or exposure to certain animal .
salmonella be part of poultry 's microbiota , so exposure to raw egg and raw poultry can increase the risk of infection .
handwashing and cook food thoroughly greatly reduce the risk of transmission .
salmonella bacteria can survive freeze for extended period but can not survive high temperature .
once the bacteria be ingest , - pron - multiply within the intestine and penetrate the epithelial mucosal cell via m cell where - pron - continue to grow ( figure two  four  .  one  eight ) .
- pron - trigger inflammatory process and the hypersecretion of fluid .
once inside the body , - pron - can persist inside the phagosome of macrophage .
salmonella can cross the epithelial cell membrane and enter the bloodstream and lymphatic system .
some strain of salmonella also produce an enterotoxin that can cause an intoxication .
infect individual develop fever , nausea , abdominal cramp , vomiting , headache , and diarrhea .
these sign and symptom generally last a few day to a week .
accord to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , there be one  ,  zero  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero case annually , with three  eight  zero death each year . [ five ]
however , because the disease be usually self - limit , many case be not report to doctor and the overall incidence may be underreporte .
diagnosis involve culture follow by serotyping and dna fingerprint if need .
positive result be report to the cdc .
when an unusual serotype be detect , sample be send to the cdc for further analysis .
serotyping be important for determine treatment .
oral rehydration therapy be commonly use .
antibiotic be only recommend for serious case .
when antibiotic be need , as in immunocompromised patient , fluoroquinolone , third - generation cephalosporin , and ampicillin be recommend .
antibiotic resistance be a serious concern .
figure two  four  .  one  eight
salmonella enter an intestinal epithelial cell by reorganize the host cell 's cytoskeleton via the trigger mechanism .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes for health )
typhoid fever
certain serotype of s . enterica , primarily serotype typhi ( s . typhi ) but also paratyphi , cause a more severe type of salmonellosis call typhoid fever .
this serious illness , which have an untreated mortality rate of one  zero % , cause high fever , body ache , headache , nausea , lethargy , and a possible rash .
some individual carry s . typhi without present sign or symptom ( know as asymptomatic carrier ) and continually shed - pron - through - pron - fece .
these carrier often have the bacteria in the gallbladder or intestinal epithelium .
individual consume food or water contaminate with these fece can become infected .
s . typhi penetrate the intestinal mucosa , grow within the macrophage , and be transport through the body , most five .
center for disease control and prevention .
salmonella .
update august two  five , two  zero  one  six .
https / / www . cdc . gov / salmonella .
one  zero  six  eight chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five notably to the liver and gallbladder .
eventually , the macrophage lyse , release s . typhi into the bloodstream and lymphatic system .
mortality can result from ulceration and perforation of the intestine .
a wide range of complication , such as pneumonia and jaundice , can occur with disseminated disease .
s . typhi have salmonella pathogenicity island ( spi ) that contain the gene for many of - pron - virulence factor .
two example of important typhoid toxin be the vi antigen , which encode for capsule production , and chimeric a two b five toxin , which cause many of the sign and symptom of the acute phase of typhoid fever .
clinical examination and culture be use to make the diagnosis .
the bacteria can be culture from fece , urine , blood , or bone marrow .
serology , include elisa , be use to identify the most pathogenic strain , but confirmation with dna testing or culture be need .
a pcr test can also be use , but be not widely available .
the recommend antibiotic treatment involve fluoroquinolone , ceftriaxone , and azithromycin .
individual must be extremely careful to avoid infect other during treatment .
typhoid fever can be prevent through vaccination for individual travel to part of the world where - pron - be common .
 why be serotype particularly important in salmonella infection and typhoid fever ?
typhoid mary mary mallon be an irish immigrant who work as a cook in new york in the early two  zero th century .
over seven year , from one  nine  zero  zero to one  nine  zero  seven , mallon work for a number of different household , unknowingly spread illness to the people who live in each one .
in one  nine  zero  six , one family hire george soper , an expert in typhoid fever epidemic , to determine the cause of the illness in - pron - household .
eventually , soper track mallon down and directly link two  two case of typhoid fever to - pron - .
- pron - discover that mallon be a carrier for typhoid but be immune to - pron - - pron - .
although active carrier have be recognize before , this be the first time that an asymptomatic carrier of infection have be identify .
because - pron - - pron - have never be ill , mallon find - pron - difficult to believe - pron - could be the source of the illness .
- pron - flee from soper and the authority because - pron - do not want to be quarantine or force to give up - pron - profession , which be relatively well pay for someone with - pron - background .
however , mallon be eventually catch and keep in an isolation facility in the bronx , where - pron - remain until one  nine  one  zero , when the new york health department release - pron - under the condition that - pron - never again work with food .
unfortunately , mallon do not comply , and - pron - soon begin work as a cook again .
after new case begin to appear that result in the death of two individual , the authority track - pron - down again and return - pron - to isolation , where - pron - remain for two  three more year until - pron - death in one  nine  three  eight .
epidemiologist be able to trace five  one case of typhoid fever and three death directly to mallon , who be unflatteringly remember as “ typhoid mary .
"
the typhoid mary case have direct correlation in the health - care industry .
consider kaci hickox , an american nurse who treat ebola patient in west africa during the two  zero  one  four epidemic .
after return to the united states , hickox be quarantine against - pron - will for three day and later find not to have ebola .
hickox vehemently oppose the quarantine .
in an editorial publish in the british newspaper the guardian , [ six ]
hickox argue that quarantine asymptomatic health - care worker who have not test positive for a disease would not only prevent such individual from practice - pron - profession , but discourage other from volunteer to work in disease - ride area where health - care worker be desperately need .
eye on ethics chapter two  four 
digestive system infections one  zero  six  nine
what be the responsibility of an individual like mary mallon to change - pron - behavior to protect other ?
what happen when an individual believe that - pron - be not a risk , but other believe that - pron - be ?
how would - pron - react if - pron - be in mallon 's shoe and be place in a quarantine - pron - do not believe be necessary , at the expense of - pron - own freedom and possibly - pron - career ?
would - pron - matter if - pron - be definitely infect or not ?
e . coli infections
the gram - negative rod escherichia coli be a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon .
although the vast majority of e . coli strain be helpful commensal bacteria , some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerous diarrheal disease .
the pathogenic strain have additional virulence factor such as type one fimbriae that promote colonization of the colon or may produce toxin ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) .
these virulence factor be acquire through horizontal gene transfer .
extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract .
although these bacteria can be spread from person to person , - pron - be often acquire through contaminate food or water .
there be six recognize pathogenic group of e . coli , but - pron - will focus here on the four that be most commonly transmit through food and water .
enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec ) , also know as traveler 's diarrhea , cause diarrheal illness and be common in less developed country .
in mexico , etec infection be call montezuma 's revenge .
follow ingestion of contaminate food or water , infect individual develop a watery diarrhea , abdominal cramp , malaise ( a feeling of be unwell ) , and a low fever .
etec produce a heat - stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin , and adhesin call colonization factor that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall .
some strain of etec also produce heat - labile toxin .
the disease be usually relatively mild and self - limit .
diagnosis involve culture and pcr .
if need , antibiotic treatment with fluoroquinolone , doxycycline , rifaximin , and trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole ( tmp / smz ) may shorten infection duration .
however , antibiotic resistance be a problem .
enteroinvasive e . coli ( eiec ) be very similar to shigellosis , include - pron - pathogenesis of intracellular invasion into intestinal epithelial tissue .
this bacterium carry a large plasmid that be involve in epithelial cell penetration .
the illness be usually self - limit , with symptom include watery diarrhea , chill , cramp , malaise , fever , and dysentery .
culturing and pcr testing can be use for diagnosis .
antibiotic treatment be not recommend , so supportive therapy be use if need .
enteropathogenic e . coli ( epec ) can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea , especially in infant and those in less developed country .
fever , vomiting , and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration .
these e . coli inject a protein ( tir ) that attach to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cell and trigger rearrangement of host cell actin from microvilli to pedestal .
tir also happen to be the receptor for intimin , a surface protein produce by epec , thereby allow e . coli to " sit " on the pedestal .
the gene necessary for this pedestal formation be encode on the locus for enterocyte effacement ( lee ) pathogenicity island .
as with etec , diagnosis involve culturing and pcr .
treatment be similar to that for etec .
the most dangerous strain be enterohemorrhagic e . coli ( ehec ) , which be the strain capable of cause epidemic .
in particular , the strain o one  five  seven  h seven have be responsible for several recent outbreak .
recall that the o and h refer to surface antigen that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response
( “ o " refer to the o - side chain of the lipopolysaccharide and the “ h " refer to the flagella ) .
similar to epec , ehec also form pedestal .
ehec also produce a shiga - like toxin .
because the genome of this bacterium have be sequence , - pron - be know that the shiga toxin gene be most likely acquire through transduction ( horizontal gene transfer ) .
the shiga toxin gene originate from shigella dysenteriae .
prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infect shigella integrate into the chromosome of e . coli .
the shiga - like toxin be often call verotoxin .
six .
kaci hickox .
“
stop call - pron - the ‘ ebola nurse .
'
"
the guardian .
november one  seven , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . theguardian . com / commentisfree / two  zero  one  four  / nov /  one  seven  / stop - call - - pron - - ebola - nurse - kaci - hickox .
one  zero  seven  zero chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five ehec can cause disease range from relatively mild to life - threaten .
symptom include bloody diarrhea with severe cramping , but no fever .
although - pron - be often self - limit , - pron - can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profuse bleeding .
one possible complication be hus .
diagnosis involve culture , often use macconkey with sorbitol agar to differentiate between e . coli o one  five  seven  h seven , which do not ferment sorbitol , and other less virulent strain of e . coli that can ferment sorbitol .
serological typing or pcr testing also can be use , as well as genetic testing for shiga toxin .
to distinguish epec from ehec , because - pron - both form pedestal on intestinal epithelial cell , - pron - be necessary to test for gene encode for both the shiga - like toxin and for the lee .
both epec and ehec have lee , but epec lack the gene for shiga toxin .
antibiotic therapy be not recommend and may worsen hus because of the toxin release when the bacteria be kill , so supportive therapy must be use .
table two  four  .  one summarize the characteristic of the four most common pathogenic group .
some pathogenic groups of e . coli group virulence factors and genes signs and symptoms diagnostic tests treatment enterotoxigenic e . coli ( etec )
heat stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin
relatively mild , watery diarrhea culturing , pcr self - limit  if need , fluoroquinolone , doxycycline , rifaximin , tmp / smz  antibiotic resistance be a problem enteroinvasive e . coli ( eiec )
inv ( invasive plasmid ) gene relatively mild , watery diarrhea  dysentery or inflammatory colitis may occur culturing , pcr  test for inv gene  additional assay to distinguish from shigella supportive therapy only  antibiotic not recommend enteropathogenic e . coli ( epec )
locus of enterocyte effacement ( lee ) pathogenicity island severe fever , vomiting , nonbloody diarrhea , dehydration  potentially fatal culturing , pcr  detection of lee lack shiga - like toxin gene self - limit  if need , fluoroquinolone , doxycycline , rifaximin ( tmp / smz )  antibiotic resistance be a problem enterohemorrhagic e . coli ( ehec )
verotoxin may be mild or very severe  bloody diarrhea  may result in hus culturing  plate on macconkey agar with sorbitol agar as - pron - do not ferment sorbitol  pcr detection of lee contain shiga - like toxin gene antibiotics be not recommend due to the risk of hus table two  four  .  one  compare and contrast the virulence factor and sign and symptom of infection with the four main e . coli group .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  seven  one cholera and other vibrio
the gastrointestinal disease cholera be a serious infection often associate with poor sanitation , especially follow natural disaster , because - pron - be spread through contaminated water and food that have not be heat to temperature high enough to kill the bacteria .
- pron - be cause by vibrio cholerae serotype o one , a gram - negative , flagellated bacterium in the shape of a curved rod ( vibrio ) .
accord to the cdc , cholera cause an estimate three to five million case and one  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero death each year . [ seven ]
because v . cholerae be kill by stomach acid , relatively large dos be need for a few microbial cell to survive to reach the intestine and cause infection .
the motile cell travel through the mucous layer of the intestine , where - pron - attach to epithelial cell and release cholera enterotoxin .
the toxin be an a - b toxin with activity through adenylate cyclase ( see virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens ) .
within the intestinal cell , cyclic amp ( camp ) level increase , which activate a chloride channel and result in the release of ion into the intestinal luman .
this increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen lead to water also enter the luman .
as the water and electrolyte leave the body , - pron - cause rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance .
diarrhea be so profuse that - pron - be often call " rice water stool ,
" and patient be place on cot with a hole in - pron - to monitor the fluid loss ( figure two  four  .  one  nine ) .
cholera be diagnose by take a stool sample and culture for vibrio .
the bacteria be oxidase positive and show non - lactose fermentation on macconkey agar .
gram - negative lactose fermenter will produce red colony while non - fermenter will produce white / colorless colony .
gram - positive bacteria will not grow on macconkey .
lactose fermentation be commonly use for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferment lactose while pathogen do not .
v . cholerae may also be culture on thiosulfate citrate bile salt sucrose ( tcbs ) agar , a selective and differential medium for vibrio spp .
, which produce a distinct yellow colony .
cholera may be self - limit and treatment involve rehydration and electrolyte replenishment .
although antibiotic be not typically need , - pron - can be use for severe or disseminated disease .
tetracycline be recommend , but doxycycline , erythromycin , orfloxacin , ciprofloxacin , and tmp / smz may be use .
recent evidence suggest that azithromycin be also a good first - line antibiotic .
good sanitation - include appropriate sewage treatment , clean supply for cooking , and purified drinking water - be important to prevent infection
( figure two  four  .  one  nine ) figure two  four  .  one  nine ( a ) outbreak of cholera often occur in area with poor sanitation or after natural disaster that compromise sanitation infrastructure .
( b )
at a cholera treatment center in haiti , patient be receive intravenous fluid to combat the dehydrating effect of this disease .
- pron - often lie on a cot with a hole in - pron - and a bucket underneath to allow for monitoring of fluid loss .
( c )
this scan electron micrograph show vibrio cholera .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention )
v . cholera be not the only vibrio specie that can cause disease .
v . parahemolyticus be associate with consumption of contaminated seafood and cause gastrointestinal illness with sign and symptom such as watery diarrhea , nausea , fever , chill , and abdominal cramp .
the bacteria produce a heat - stable hemolysin , lead to dysentery and possible disseminate disease .
- pron - also sometimes cause wound infection .
v . parahemolyticus be diagnose use culture from seven .
center for disease control and prevention .
cholera - vibrio cholerae infection .
update november six , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . cdc . gov / cholera / general .
accessed sept one  four , two  zero  one  six .
one  zero  seven  two chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five blood , stool , or a wound .
as with v . cholera , selective medium ( especially tcbs agar ) work well .
tetracycline and ciprofloxacin can be use to treat severe case , but antibiotic generally be not need .
vibrio vulnificus be find in warm seawater and , unlike v . cholerae , be not associate with poor sanitary condition .
the bacteria can be find in raw seafood , and ingestion cause gastrointestinal illness .
- pron - can also be acquire by individual with open skin wound who be expose to water with high concentration of the pathogen .
in some case , the infection spread to the bloodstream and cause septicemia .
skin infection can lead to edema , ecchymosis ( discoloration of skin due to bleed ) , and abscess .
patient with underlie disease have a high fatality rate of about five  zero % .
- pron - be of particular concern for individual with chronic liver disease or who be otherwise immunodeficient because a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from develop .
v . vulnificus be diagnose by culture for the pathogen from stool sample , blood sample , or skin abscess .
adult patient be treat with doxycycline combine with a third generation cephalosporin or with fluoroquinolone , and child be treat with tmp / smz .
two other vibrio , aeromonas hydrophila and plesiomonas shigelloide , be also associate with marine environment and raw seafood  - pron - can also cause gastroenteritis .
like v . vulnificus , a . hydrophila be more often associate with infection in wound , generally those acquire in water .
in some case , - pron - can also cause septicemia .
other specie of aeromonas can cause illness .
p . shigelloide be sometimes associate with more serious systemic infection if ingest in contaminate food or water .
culture can be use to diagnose a . hydrophila and p . shigelloide infection , for which antibiotic therapy be generally not need .
when necessary , tetracycline and ciprofloxacin , among other antibiotic , may be use for treatment of a . hydrophila , and fluoroquinolone and trimethoprim be the effective treatment for p . shigelloide .

how do v . cholera infection cause rapid dehydration ?
campylobacter jejuni
gastroenteritis campylobacter be a genus of gram - negative , spiral or curved bacteria .
- pron - may have one or two flagellum .
campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis , a form of campylobacteriosis , be a widespread illness that be cause by campylobacter jejuni .
the primary route of transmission be through poultry that become contaminate during slaughter .
handle of the raw chicken in turn contaminate cooking surface , utensil , and other food .
unpasteurize milk or contaminated water be also potential vehicle of transmission .
in most case , the illness be self - limit and include fever , diarrhea , cramp , vomiting , and sometimes dysentery .
more serious sign and symptom , such as bacteremia , meningitis , pancreatitis , cholecystitis , and hepatitis , sometimes occur .
- pron - have also be associate with autoimmune condition such as guillain - barré syndrome , a neurological disease that occur after some infection and result in temporary paralysis .
hus follow infection can also occur .
the virulence in many strain be the result of hemolysin production and the presence of campylobacter cytolethal distend toxin ( cdt ) , a powerful deoxyribonuclease ( dnase ) that irreversibly damage host cell dna .
diagnosis involve culture under special condition , such as elevated temperature , low oxygen tension , and often medium supplement with antimicrobial agent .
these bacteria should be culture on selective medium ( such as campy cv , charcoal selective medium , or cefaperazone charcoal deoxycholate agar ) and incubate under microaerophilic condition for at least seven  two hour at four  two ° c .
antibiotic treatment be not usually need , but erythromycin or ciprofloxacin may be use .
peptic ulcers
the gram - negative bacterium helicobacter pylorus be able to tolerate the acidic environment of the human stomach and have be show to be a major cause of peptic ulcer , which be ulcer of the stomach or duodenum .
the bacterium be also associate with increase risk of stomach cancer ( figure two  four  .  two  zero ) .
accord to the cdc , approximately twothird of the population be infect with h . pylorus , but less than two  zero % have a risk of develop ulcer or stomach chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  seven  three cancer .
h . pylorus be find in approximately eight  zero % of stomach ulcer and in over nine  zero % of duodenal ulcers . [ eight ] h . pylorus colonize epithelial cell in the stomach use pili for adhesion .
these bacteria produce urease , which stimulate an immune response and create ammonia that neutralize stomach acid to provide a more hospitable microenvironment .
the infection damage the cell of the stomach lining , include those that normally produce the protective mucus that serve as a barrier between the tissue and stomach acid .
as a result , inflammation ( gastritis ) occur and ulcer may slowly develop .
ulcer formation can also be cause by toxin activity .
- pron - have be report that five  zero % of clinical isolate of h . pylorus have detectable level of exotoxin activity in vitro . [ nine ]
this toxin , vaca , induce vacuole formation in host cell .
vaca have no primary sequence homology with other bacterial toxin , and in a mouse model , there be a correlation between the presence of the toxin gene , the activity of the toxin , and gastric epithelial tissue damage .
sign and symptom include nausea , lack of appetite , bloating , burping , and weight loss .
bleed ulcer may produce dark stool .
if no treatment be provide , the ulcer can become deep , more tissue can be involve , and stomach perforation can occur .
because perforation allow digestive enzyme and acid to leak into the body , - pron - be a very serious condition .
eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
helicobacter pylorus  fact sheet for health care providers .
"
update july one  nine  nine  eight .
http / / www . cdc . gov / ulcer / files / hpfacts . pdf .
nine .
t . l . cover .
"
the vacuolating cytotoxin of helicobacter pylorus .
"
molecular microbiology two  zero ( one  nine  nine  six ) two 
pp .
two  four  one – two  four  six .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed /  eight  seven  three  three  two  two  three .
one  zero  seven  four
chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  zero helicobacter infection decrease mucus production and cause peptic ulcer .
( credit top left photo  modification of work by " santhosh thomas " / youtube  credit top right photo  modification of work by moriya m , uehara a , okumura t , miyamoto m , and kohgo y )
to diagnose h . pylorus infection , multiple method be available .
in a breath test , the patient swallow radiolabele urea .
if h . pylorus be present , the bacteria will produce urease to break down the urea .
this reaction produce radiolabeled carbon dioxide that can be detect in the patient 's breath .
blood testing can also be use to detect antibody to h . pylorus .
the bacteria - pron - can be detect use either a stool test or a stomach wall biopsy .
antibiotic can be use to treat the infection .
however , unique to h . pylorus , the recommendation from the us food and drug administration be to use a triple therapy .
the current protocol be one  zero day of treatment with omeprazole , amoxicillin , and clarithromycin ( oac )  one  four day of treatment with bismuth subsalicylate , metronidazole , and tetracycline ( bmt )  or one  zero or one  four day of treatment with lansoprazole , amoxicillin , and clarithromycin ( lac ) .
omeprazole , bismuth subsalicylate , and lansoprazole be not antibiotic but be instead use to decrease acid level because h . pylorus prefer acidic environment .
although treatment be often valuable , there be also risk to h . pylorus eradication .
infection with h . pylorus may chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  seven  five actually protect against some cancer , such as esophageal adenocarcinoma and gastroesophageal reflux disease . [ one  zero ][ one  one ]

how do h . pylorus cause peptic ulcer ?
clostridium perfringen gastroenteritis clostridium perfringen gastroenteritis be a generally mild foodborne disease that be associate with undercooked meat and other food .
c . perfringen be a gram - positive , rod - shape , endospore - form anaerobic bacterium that be tolerant of high and low temperature .
at high temperature , the bacteria can form endospore that will germinate rapidly in food or within the intestine .
food poisoning by type
a strain be common .
this strain always produce an enterotoxin , sometimes also present in other strain , that cause the clinical symptom of cramp and diarrhea .
a more severe form of the illness , call pig - bel or enteritis necrotican , cause hemorrhaging , pain , vomiting , and bloating .
gangrene of the intestine may result .
this form have a high mortality rate but be rare in the united states .
diagnosis involve detect the c . perfringen toxin in stool sample use either molecular biology technique ( pcr detection of the toxin gene ) or immunology technique ( elisa ) .
the bacteria - pron - may also be detect in food or in fecal sample .
treatment include rehydration therapy , electrolyte replacement , and intravenous fluid .
antibiotic be not recommend because - pron - can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut , and there be concern about antibiotic resistance .
the illness can be prevent through proper handling and cooking of food , include prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperature and cook food to a sufficiently high temperature .
clostridium difficile clostridium difficile be a gram - positive rod that can be a commensal bacterium as part of the normal microbiota of healthy individual .
when the normal microbiota be disrupt by long - term antibiotic use , - pron - can allow the overgrowth of this bacterium , result in antibiotic - associate diarrhea cause by c . difficile .
antibiotic - associate diarrhea can also be consider a nosocomial disease .
patient at the great risk of c . difficile infection be those who be immunocompromise , have be in health - care setting for extended period , be old , have recently take antibiotic , have have gastrointestinal procedure do , or use proton pump inhibitor , which reduce stomach acidity and allow proliferation of c . difficile .
because this specie can form endospore , - pron - can survive for extended period of time in the environment under harsh condition and be a considerable concern in health - care setting .
this bacterium produce two toxin , clostridium difficile toxin a ( tcda ) and clostridium difficile toxin b ( tcdb ) .
these toxin inactivate small gtp - bind protein , result in actin condensation and cell rounding , follow by cell death .
infection begin with focal necrosis , then ulceration with exudate , and can progress to pseudomembranous colitis , which involve inflammation of the colon and the development of a pseudomembrane of fibrin contain dead epithelial cell and leukocyte ( figure two  four  .  two  one ) .
watery diarrhea , dehydration , fever , loss of appetite , and abdominal pain can result .
perforation of the colon can occur , lead to septicemia , shock , and death .
c . difficile be also associate with necrotize enterocolitis in premature baby and neutropenic enterocolitis associate with cancer therapy .
one  zero .
martin j . blaser .
“
disappear microbiota  helicobacter pylori protection against esophageal adenocarcinoma .
”
cancer prevention research one ( two  zero  zero  eight ) five 
pp .
three  zero  eight – three  one  one .
http / / cancerpreventionresearch . aacrjournals . org / content /  one  /  five  /  three  zero  eight  . full . pdf+html .
one  one .
ivan f . n . hung and benjamin c . y . wong .
“
assess the risks and benefits of treating helicobacter pylorus infection .
"
therapeutic advance in gastroenterology two ( two  zero  zero  nine )
three
 pp , one  four  one – one  four  seven .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  one  seven  seven  /  one  seven  five  six  two  eight  three x zero  eight  one  zero  zero  two  seven  nine .
one  zero  seven  six chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  one clostridium difficile be able to colonize the mucous membrane of the colon when the normal microbiota be disrupt .
the toxin
tcda and tcdb trigger an immune response , with neutrophil and monocyte migrate from the bloodstream to the site of infection .
over time , inflammation and dead cell contribute to the development of a pseudomembrane .
( credit micrograph  modification of work by janice carr , centers for disease control and prevention )
diagnosis be make by consider the patient history ( such as exposure to antibiotic ) , clinical presentation , imaging , endoscopy , lab test , and other available datum .
detect the toxin in stool sample be use to confirm diagnosis .
although culture be prefer , - pron - be rarely practical in clinical practice because the bacterium be an obligate anaerobe .
nucleic acid amplification test , include pcr , be consider preferable to elisa testing for molecular analysis .
the first step of conventional treatment be to stop antibiotic use , and then to provide supportive therapy with electrolyte replacement and fluid .
metronidazole be the preferred treatment if the c . difficile diagnosis have be confirm .
vancomycin can also be use , but - pron - should be reserve for patient for whom metronidazole be ineffective or who meet other criterion ( e . g . , under one  zero year of age , pregnant , or allergic to metronidazole ) .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  seven  seven
a new approach to treatment , know as a fecal transplant , focus on restore the microbiota of the gut in order to combat the infection .
in this procedure , a healthy individual donate a stool sample , which be mixed with saline and transplant to the recipient via colonoscopy , endoscopy , sigmoidoscopy , or enema .
- pron - have be report that this procedure have great than nine  zero % success in resolve c . difficile infections . [ one  two ] 
how do antibiotic use lead to c . difficile infection ?
foodborne illness due to bacillus
cereus bacillus cereus , commonly find in soil , be a gram - positive endospore - form bacterium that can sometimes cause foodborne illness .
b . cereus endospore can survive cooking and produce enterotoxin in food after - pron - have be heat  illness often occur after eat rice and other prepared food leave at room temperature for too long .
the sign and symptom appear within a few hour of ingestion and include nausea , pain , and abdominal cramp .
b . cereus produce two toxin  one cause diarrhea , and the other cause vomiting .
more severe sign and symptom can sometimes develop .
diagnosis can be accomplish by isolate bacteria from stool sample or vomitus and uneaten infect food .
treatment involve rehydration and supportive therapy .
antibiotic be not typically need , as the illness be usually relatively mild and be due to toxin activity .
foodborne illness due to yersinia
the genus yersinia be best known for yersinia pestis , a gram - negative rod that cause the plague .
however , y . enterocolitica and y . pseudotuberculosis can cause gastroenteritis .
the infection be generally transmit through the fecal - oral route , with ingestion of food or water that have be contaminate by fece .
intoxication can also result because of the activity of - pron - endotoxin and exotoxin ( enterotoxin and cytotoxin necrotize factor ) .
the illness be normally relatively mild and self - limit .
however , severe diarrhea and dysentery can develop in infant .
in adult , the infection can spread and cause complication such as reactive arthritis , thyroid disorder , endocarditis , glomerulonephritis , eye inflammation , and / or erythema nodosum .
bacteremia may develop in rare case .
diagnosis be generally make by detect the bacteria in stool sample .
sample may also be obtain from other tissue or body fluid .
treatment be usually supportive , include rehydration , without antibiotic .
if bacteremia or other systemic disease be present , then antibiotic such as fluoroquinolone , aminoglycosides , doxycycline , and trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole may be use .
recovery can take up to two week .

compare and contrast foodborne illness due to b . cereus and yersinia .
one  two .
faith rohlke and neil stollman .
“
fecal microbiota transplantation in relapsing clostridium difficile infection , " therapeutic advance in gastroenterology five ( two  zero  one  two )
six
 four  zero  three – four  two  zero .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  one  seven  seven  /  one  seven  five  six  two  eight  three x one  two  four  five  three  six  three  seven .
one  zero  seven  eight chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract bacterial infection of the gastrointestinal tract generally occur when bacteria or bacterial toxin be ingest in contaminate food or water .
toxin and other virulence factor can produce gastrointestinal inflammation and general symptom such as diarrhea and vomiting .
bacterial gi infection can vary widely in term of severity and treatment .
some can be treat with antibiotic , but in other case antibiotic may be ineffective in combat toxin or even counterproductive if - pron - compromise the gi microbiota .
figure two  four  .  two  two and figure two  four  .  two  three the key feature of common bacterial gi infection .
disease profile chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  seven  nine figure two  four  .  two  two one  zero  eight  zero chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  three chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  eight  one part two
at the hospital , carli 's doctor begin to think about possible cause of - pron - severe gastrointestinal distress .
one possibility be food poisoning , but no one else in - pron - family be sick .
the doctor ask about what carli have eat the previous day  - pron - mother mention that - pron - would have egg for lunch , and that - pron - may have be a little undercooked .
the doctor take a sample of carli 's stool and send - pron - for laboratory testing as part of - pron - workup .
- pron - suspect that carli could have a case of bacterial or viral gastroenteritis , but - pron - need to know the cause in order to prescribe an appropriate treatment .
in the laboratory , technician microscopically identify gram - negative bacilli in carli 's stool sample .
- pron - also establish a pure culture of the bacteria and analyze - pron - for antigen .
this testing show that the causative agent be salmonella .

what should the doctor do now to treat carli ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
two  four  .  four viral infections of the gastrointestinal tract learning objectives
 identify the most common virus that can cause infection of the gi tract

compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease affect the gi tract and liver
in the develop world , acute viral gastroenteritis be devastating and a lead cause of death for children . [ one  three ]
worldwide , diarrhea be the second leading cause of mortality for child under age five , and seven  zero % of childhood gastroenteritis be viral . [ one  four ]
as discuss , there be a number of bacteria responsible for diarrhea , but virus can also cause diarrhea .
e . coli and rotavirus be the most common causative agent in the develop world .
in this section , - pron - will discuss rotavirus and other , less common virus that can also cause gastrointestinal illness .
gastroenteritis cause by rotaviruses rotaviruses be double - strand rna virus in the family reoviridae .
- pron - be responsible for common diarrheal illness , although prevention through vaccination be become more common .
the virus be primarily spread by the fecal - oral route ( figure two  four  .  two  four ) .
clinical focus one  three .
caleb k . king , roger glass , joseph s . bresee , christopher duggan .
“
manage acute gastroenteritis among child  oral rehydration , maintenance , and nutritional therapy .
"
mmwr five  two ( two  zero  zero  three )
rr one  six 
pp .
one – one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / mmwr / preview / mmwrhtml /
rr five  two  one  six a one  . htm .
one  four .
elizabeth jane elliott .
“
acute gastroenteritis in children .
"
british medical journal three  three  four ( two  zero  zero  seven ) seven  five  eight  three  three  five – four  zero , doi  one  zero  .  one  one  three  six  / bmj .  three  nine  zero  three  six  .  four  zero  six  one  six  nine  .  eight  zero  s . ramani and g . kang .
"
viruses causing diarrhoea in the developing world .
"
current opinions in infectious diseases two  two ( two  zero  zero  nine ) five 
pp .
four  seven  seven – four  eight  two .
doi 
one  zero  .  one  zero  nine  seven  / qco .  zero b zero  one  three e three  two  eight  three  three  zero  six  six  two f  michael vincent f tablang .
“
viral gastroenteritis .
"
medscape .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article /  one  seven  six  five  one  five  - overview .
one  zero  eight  two chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  four rotaviruses in a fecal sample be visualized use electron microscopy .
( credit  dr . graham beards )
these virus be widespread in child , especially in day - care center .
the cdc estimate that nine  five % of child in the united states have have at least one rotavirus infection by the time - pron - reach age five . [ one  five ]
due to the memory of the body 's immune system , adult who come into contact with rotavirus will not contract the infection or , if - pron - do , be asymptomatic .
the elderly , however , be vulnerable to rotavirus infection due to weakening of the immune system with age , so infection can spread through nursing home and similar facility .
in these case , the infection may be transmit from a family member who may have subclinical or clinical disease .
the virus can also be transmit from contaminate surface , on which - pron - can survive for some time .
infect individual exhibit fever , vomiting , and diarrhea .
the virus can survive in the stomach follow a meal , but be normally find in the small intestine , particularly the epithelial cell on the villi .
infection can cause food intolerance , especially with respect to lactose .
the illness generally appear after an incubation period of about two day and last for approximately one week ( three to eight day ) .
without supportive treatment , the illness can cause severe fluid loss , dehydration , and even death .
even with milder illness , repeat infection can potentially lead to malnutrition , especially in develop country , where rotavirus infection be common due to poor sanitation and lack of access to clean drinking water .
patient ( especially child ) who be malnourish after an episode of diarrhea be more susceptible to future diarrheal illness , increase - pron - risk of death from rotavirus infection .
the most common clinical tool for diagnosis be enzyme immunoassay , which detect the virus from fecal sample .
latex agglutination assay be also use .
additionally , the virus can be detect use electron microscopy and rtpcr .
treatment be supportive with oral rehydration therapy .
preventive vaccination be also available .
in the united states , rotavirus vaccine be part of the standard vaccine schedule and administration follow the guideline of the world health organization ( who ) .
the who recommend that all infant worldwide receive the rotavirus vaccine , the first dose between six and one  five week of age and the second before three  two weeks . [ one  six ]
gastroenteritis cause by noroviruses noroviruses , commonly identify as norwalk virus , be caliciviruse .
several strain can cause gastroenteritis .
there be million of case a year , predominately in infant , young child , and the elderly .
these virus be easily transmit and highly contagious .
- pron - be know for cause widespread infection in group of people in confine space , such as on cruise ship .
the virus can be transmit through direct contact , through touch one  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
rotavirus , " the pink book .
updated september eight , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / vaccines / pub / pinkbook / rota . html .
one  six .
world health organization .
“
rotavirus .
"
immunization , vaccines , and biologicals .
update april two  one , two  zero  one  zero . http / / www . who . int / immunization / topic / rotavirus / en / . chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  eight  three contaminate surface , and through contaminate food .
because the virus be not kill by disinfectant use at standard concentration for kill bacteria , the risk of transmission remain high , even after clean .
the sign and symptom of norovirus infection be similar to those for rotavirus , with watery diarrhea , mild cramp , and fever .
additionally , these virus sometimes cause projectile vomit .
the illness be usually relatively mild , develop one  two to four  eight hour after exposure , and clear within a couple of day without treatment .
however , dehydration may occur .
norovirus can be detect use pcr or enzyme immunoassay ( eia ) testing .
rt - qpcr be the preferred approach as eia be insufficiently sensitive .
if eia be use for rapid testing , diagnosis should be confirm use pcr .
no medication be available , but the illness be usually self - limit .
rehydration therapy and electrolyte replacement may be use .
good hygiene , hand washing , and careful food preparation reduce the risk of infection .
gastroenteritis cause by astroviruse astroviruses be single - strand rna virus ( family astroviridae ) that can cause severe gastroenteritis , especially in infant and child .
sign and symptom include diarrhea , nausea , vomiting , fever , abdominal pain , headache , and malaise .
the virus be transmit through the fecal - oral route ( contaminate food or water ) .
for diagnosis , stool sample be analyze .
testing may involve enzyme immunoassay and immune electron microscopy .
treatment involve supportive rehydration and electrolyte replacement if need .
 why be rotavirus , noroviruse , and astroviruse more common in child ?
viral infections of the gastrointestinal tract
a number of virus can cause gastroenteritis , characterize by inflammation of the gi tract and other sign and symptom with a range of severity .
as with bacterial gi infection , some case can be relatively mild and self - limit , while other can become serious and require intensive treatment .
antimicrobial drug be generally not use to treat viral gastroenteritis  generally , these illness can be treat effectively with rehydration therapy to replace fluid lose in bout of diarrhea and vomiting .
because most viral cause of gastroenteriti be quite contagious , the good preventive measure involve avoid and / or isolate infect individual and limit transmission through good hygiene and sanitation .
disease profile one  zero  eight  four chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  five
hepatitis hepatitis be a general term mean inflammation of the liver , which can have a variety of cause .
in some case , the cause be viral infection .
there be five main hepatitis virus that be clinically significant  hepatitisviruse a ( hav ) , b ( hbv ) , c ( hcv ) , d , ( hdv ) and e ( hev )
( figure two  four  .  two  six ) .
note that other virus , such as epstein - barr virus ( ebv ) , yellow fever , and cytomegalovirus ( cmv ) can also cause hepatitis and be discuss in viral infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems .
figure two  four  .  two  six
five main type of virus cause hepatitis .
hav be a non - envelop ssrna ( + ) virus and be a member of the picornavirus family ( baltimore group iv ) .
hbv be a dsdna envelop virus , replicate use reverse transcriptase , and be a member of the hepadnavirus family ( baltimore group vii ) .
hcv be an envelop ssrna ( + ) virus and be a member of the flavivirus family ( baltimore group iv ) .
hdv be an envelop ssrna ( – ) that be circular ( baltimore group v ) .
this virus can only propagate in the presence of hbv .
hev be a non - envelop ssrna ( + ) virus and a member of the hepeviridae family ( baltimore group iv ) .
although the five hepatitis virus differ , - pron - can cause some similar sign and symptom because - pron - all have an affinity for hepatocyte ( liver cell ) .
hav and hev can be contract through ingestion while hbv , hcv , and hdv be transmit by parenteral contact .
- pron - be possible for individual to become long term or chronic carrier of hepatitis virus .
chapter two  four 
digestive system infections one  zero  eight  five
the virus enter the blood ( viremia ) , spread to the spleen , the kidney , and the liver .
during viral replication , the virus infect hepatocyte .
the inflammation be cause by the hepatocyte replicate and release more hepatitis virus .
sign and symptom include malaise , anorexia , loss of appetite , dark urine , pain in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen , vomiting , nausea , diarrhea , joint pain , and gray stool .
additionally , when the liver be disease or injure , - pron - be unable to break down hemoglobin effectively , and bilirubin can build up in the body , give the skin and mucous membrane a yellowish color , a condition call jaundice ( figure two  four  .  two  seven ) .
in severe case , death from liver necrosis may occur .
figure two  four  .  two  seven ( a )
hepatitis be inflammation of the liver result from a variety of root cause .
- pron - can cause jaundice .
( b )
jaundice be characterize by yellow of the skin , mucous membrane , and sclera of the eye .
( credit b leave  modification of work by james heilman , md  credit
b right  modification of work by “ sab three el three eish” / wikimedia commons )
despite have many similarity , each of the hepatitis virus have - pron - own unique characteristic .
hav be generally transmit through the fecal - oral route , close personal contact , or exposure to contaminate water or food .
hepatitis a can develop after an incubation period of one  five to five  zero day ( the mean be three  zero ) .
- pron - be normally mild or even asymptomatic and be usually self - limit within week to month .
a more severe form , fulminant hepatitis , rarely occur but have a high fatality rate of seven  zero – eight  zero % .
vaccination be available and be recommend especially for child ( between age one and two ) , those travel to country with high risk , those with liver disease and certain other condition , and drug user .
although hbv be associate with similar sign and symptom , transmission and outcome differ .
this virus have a mean incubation period of one  two  zero day and be generally associate with exposure to infectious blood or body fluid such as seman or saliva .
exposure can occur through skin puncture , across the placenta , or through mucosal contact , but - pron - be not spread through casual contact such as hugging , hand holding , sneeze , or cough , or even through breastfeed or kissing .
risk of infection be great for those who use intravenous drug or who have sexual contact with an infect individual .
health - care worker be also at risk from needle stick and other injury when treat infected patient .
the infection can become chronic and may progress to cirrhosis or liver failure .
- pron - be also associate with liver cancer .
chronic infection be associate with the high mortality rate and be more common in infant .
approximately nine  zero % of infected infant become chronic carrier , compare with only six – one  zero % of infect adults . [ one  seven ] vaccination be available and be recommend for child as part of the standard vaccination schedule ( one dose at birth and the second by one  eight month of age ) and for adult at great risk ( e . g . , those with certain disease , intravenous drug user , and those who have sex with multiple partner ) .
health - care agency be require to offer the hbv vaccine to all worker who have occupational exposure to blood and / or other infectious material .
hcv be often undiagnosed and therefore may be more widespread than be document .
- pron - have a mean incubation one  seven .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
the abc of hepatitis .
"
updated two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / hepatitis / resources / professional / pdf / abctable . pdf .
one  zero  eight  six chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five period of four  five day and be transmit through contact with infected blood .
although some case be asymptomatic and / or resolve spontaneously , seven  five %– eight  five % of infected individual become chronic carrier .
nearly all case result from parenteral transmission often associate with iv drug use or transfusion .
the risk be great for individual with past or current history of intravenous drug use or who have have sexual contact with infect individual .
- pron - have also be spread through contaminate blood product and can even be transmit through contaminate personal product such as toothbrush and razor .
new medication have recently be develop that show great effectiveness in treat hcv and that be tailor to the specific genotype cause the infection .
hdv be uncommon in the united states and only occur in individual who be already infect with hbv , which - pron - require for replication .
therefore , vaccination against hbv be also protective against hdv infection .
hdv be transmit through contact with infected blood .
hev infection be also rare in the united states but many individual have a positive antibody titer for hev .
the virus be most commonly spread by the fecal - oral route through food and / or water contamination , or personto - person contact , depend on the genotype of the virus , which vary by location .
there be four genotype that differ somewhat in - pron - mode of transmission , distribution , and other factor ( for example , two be zoonotic and two be not , and only one cause chronic infection ) .
genotype three and four be only transmit through food , while genotype one and two be also transmit through water and fecal - oral route .
genotype one be the only type transmit person - to - person and be the most common cause of hev outbreak .
consumption of undercooked meat , especially deer or pork , and shellfish can lead to infection .
genotype three and four be zoonosis , so - pron - can be transmit from infected animal that be consume .
pregnant woman be at particular risk .
this disease be usually self - limit within two week and do not appear to cause chronic infection .
general laboratory testing for hepatitis begin with blood testing to examine liver function ( figure two  four  .  two  eight ) .
when the liver be not function normally , the blood will contain elevated level of alkaline phosphatase , alanine aminotransferase ( alt ) , aspartate aminotransferase ( ast ) , direct bilirubin , total bilirubin , serum albumin , serum total protein , and calculated globulin , albumin / globulin ( a / g ) ratio .
some of these be include in a complete metabolic panel ( cmp ) , which may first suggest a possible liver problem and indicate the need for more comprehensive testing .
a hepatitis virus serological test panel can be use to detect antibody for hepatitis virus
a , b , c , and sometimes d . additionally , other immunological and genomic test be available .
specific treatment other than supportive therapy , rest , and fluid be often not available for hepatitis virus infection , except for hcv , which be often self - limited .
immunoglobulin can be use prophylactically follow possible exposure .
medication be also use , include interferon alpha two b and antiviral ( e . g . , lamivudine , entecavir , adefovir , and telbivudine ) for chronic infection .
hepatitis c can be treat with interferon ( as monotherapy or combine with other treatment ) , protease inhibitor , and other antiviral ( e . g . , the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir ) .
combination treatment be commonly use .
antiviral and immunosuppressive medication may be use for chronic case of hev .
in severe case , liver transplant may be necessary .
additionally , vaccine be available to prevent infection with hav and hbv .
the hav vaccine be also protective against hev .
the hbv vaccine be also protective against hdv .
there be no vaccine against hcv .
learn more information about hepatitis virus ( https / / www . cdc . gov / hepatitis / resource / professional / pdfs / abctable . pdf ) infection .
link to learning chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  eight  seven

why do the five different hepatitis virus all cause similar sign and symptom ?
prevent hbv transmission in health - care settings hepatitis b be once a lead on - the - job hazard for health - care worker .
many health - care worker over the year have become infect , some develop cirrhosis and liver cancer .
in one  nine  eight  two , the cdc recommend that health - care worker be vaccinate against hbv , and rate of infection have decline since then .
even though vaccination be now common , - pron - be not always effective and not all individual be vaccinate .
therefore , there be still a small risk for infection , especially for health - care worker work with individual who have chronic infection , such as drug addict , and for those with high risk of needle stick , such as phlebotomist .
dentist be also at risk .
health - care worker need to take appropriate precaution to prevent infection by hbv and other illness .
blood be the great risk , but other body fluid can also transmit infection .
damaged skin , as occur with eczema or psoriasis , can also allow transmission .
avoid contact with body fluid , especially blood , by wear glove and face protection and use disposable syrinx and needle reduce the risk of infection .
washing expose skin with soap and water be recommend .
antiseptic may also be use , but may not help .
post - exposure treatment , include treatment with hepatitis b immunoglobulin ( hbig ) and vaccination , may be use in the event of exposure to the virus from an infected patient .
detailed protocol be available for manage these situation .
the virus can remain infective for up to seven day when on surface , even if no blood or other fluid be visible , so - pron - be important to consider the good choice for disinfect and sterilize equipment that could potentially transmit the virus .
the cdc recommend a solution of one  zero % bleach to disinfect surfaces . [ one  eight ]
finally , testing blood product be important to reduce the risk of transmission during transfusion and similar procedure .
viral hepatitis hepatitis involve inflammation of the liver that typically manifest with sign and symptom such as jaundice , nausea , vomiting , joint pain , gray stool , and loss of appetite .
however , the severity and duration of the disease can vary greatly depend on the causative agent .
some infection may be completely asymptomatic , whereas other may be life threaten .
the five different virus capable of cause hepatitis be compare in figure two  four  .  two  eight .
for the sake of comparison , this table present only the unique aspect of each form of viral hepatitis , not the commonality .
micro connections disease profile one  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
hepatitis b faq for health professionals .
"
update august four , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / hepatitis / hbv / hbvfaq . htm .
one  zero  eight  eight chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  two  eight chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  eight  nine two  four  .  five protozoan infections of the gastrointestinal tract learning objectives
 identify the most common protozoan that can cause infection of the gi tract

compare the major characteristic of specific protozoan disease affect the gi tract like other microbe , protozoa be abundant in natural microbiota but can also be associate with significant illness .
gastrointestinal disease cause by protozoa be generally associate with exposure to contaminate food and water , mean that those without access to good sanitation be at great risk .
even in develop country , infection can occur and these microbe have sometimes cause significant outbreak from contamination of public water supply .
giardiasis also call backpacker 's diarrhea or beaver fever , giardiasis be a common disease in the united states cause by the flagellate protist giardia lamblia , also know as giardia intestinali or giardia duodenalis ( figure one  .  one  six ) .
to establish infection , g . lamblia use a large adhesive disk to attach to the intestinal mucosa .
the disk be comprise of microtubule .
during adhesion , the flagella of g . lamblia move in a manner that draw fluid out from under the disk , result in an area of low pressure that promote - pron - adhesion to the intestinal epithelial cell .
due to - pron - attachment , giardia also block absorption of nutrient , include fat .
transmission occur through contaminate food or water or directly from person to person .
child in day - care center be at risk due to - pron - tendency to put item into - pron - mouth that may be contaminate .
large outbreak may occur if a public water supply become contaminate .
giardia have a resistant cyst stage in - pron - life cycle that be able to survive cold temperature and the chlorination treatment typically use for drinking water in municipal reservoir .
as a result , municipal water must be filter to trap and remove these cyst .
once consume by the host , giardia develop into the active tropozoite .
infect individual may be asymptomatic or have gastrointestinal sign and symptom , sometimes accompany by weight loss .
common symptom , which appear one to three week after exposure , include diarrhea , nausea , stomach cramp , gas , greasy stool ( because fat absorption be be block ) , and possible dehydration .
the parasite remain in the colon and do not cause systemic infection .
sign and symptom generally clear within two to six week .
chronic infection may develop and be often resistant to treatment .
these be associate with weight loss , episodic diarrhea , and malabsorption syndrome due to the block nutrient absorption .
diagnosis may be make use observation under the microscope .
a stool ova and parasite ( o and p ) exam involve direct examination of a stool sample for the presence of cyst and trophozoite  - pron - can be use to distinguish common parasitic intestinal infection .
elisa and other immunoassay test , include commercial direct fluorescence antibody kit , be also use .
the most common treatment use metronidazole as the first - line choice , follow by tinidazole .
if the infection become chronic , the parasite may become resistant to medication .
cryptosporidiosis
another protozoan intestinal illness be cryptosporidiosis , which be usually cause by cryptosporidium parvum or c . homini .
( figure two  four  .  two  nine )
these pathogen be commonly find in animal and can be spread in fece from mouse , bird , and farm animal .
contaminated water and food be most commonly responsible for transmission .
the protozoan can also be transmit through human contact with infected animal or - pron - fece .
in the united states , outbreak of cryptosporidiosis generally occur through contamination of the public water supply or contaminate water at water park , swimming pool , and day - care center .
the risk be great in area with poor sanitation , make the disease more common in develop country .
sign and symptom include watery diarrhea , nausea , vomiting , cramp , fever , dehydration , and weight loss .
the illness be generally self - limit within a month .
however , immunocompromised patient , such as those with hiv / aids , be at particular risk of severe illness or death .
one  zero  nine  zero chapter two  four
 digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five diagnosis involve direct examination of stool sample , often over multiple day .
as with giardiasis , a stool o and p exam may be helpful .
acid fast staining be often use .
enzyme immunoassay and molecular analysis ( pcr ) be available .
the first line of treatment be typically oral rehydration therapy .
medication be sometimes use to treat the diarrhea .
the broad - range anti - parasitic drug nitazoxanide can be use to treat cryptosporidiosis .
other anti - parasitic drug that can be use include azithromycin and paromomycin .
figure two  four  .  two  nine immunofluorescent staining allow for visualization of cryptosporidium spp .
( credit  modification of work by epa / h . d . a . lindquist )
amoebiasis ( amebiasis )
the protozoan parasite entamoeba histolytica cause amoebiasis , which be know as amoebic dysentery in severe case .
e . histolytica be generally transmit through water or food that have fecal contamination .
the disease be most widespread in the develop world and be one of the lead cause of mortality from parasitic disease worldwide .
disease can be cause by as few as one  zero cyst be transmit .
sign and symptom range from nonexistent to mild diarrhea to severe amoebic dysentery .
severe infection cause the abdomen to become distended and may be associate with fever .
the parasite may live in the colon without cause sign or symptom or may invade the mucosa to cause colitis .
in some case , the disease spread to the spleen , brain , genitourinary tract , or lung .
in particular , - pron - may spread to the liver and cause an abscess .
when a liver abscess develop , fever , nausea , liver tenderness , weight loss , and pain in the right abdominal quadrant may occur .
chronic infection may occur and be associate with intermittent diarrhea , mucus , pain , flatulence , and weight loss .
direct examination of fecal specimen may be use for diagnosis .
as with cryptosporidiosis , sample be often examine on multiple day .
a stool o and p exam of fecal or biopsy specimen may be helpful .
immunoassay , serology , biopsy , molecular , and antibody detection test be available .
enzyme immunoassay may not distinguish current from past illness .
magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) can be use to detect any liver abscess .
the first line of treatment be metronidazole or tinidazole , follow by diloxanide furoate , iodoquinol , or paromomycin to eliminate the cyst that remain .
cyclosporiasis
the intestinal disease cyclosporiasis be cause by the protozoan cyclospora cayetanensis .
- pron - be endemic to tropical and subtropical region and therefore uncommon in the united states , although there have be outbreak associate with contaminated produce import from region where the protozoan be more common .
chapter two  four

digestive system infection one  zero  nine  one
this protist be transmit through contaminate food and water and reach the lining of the small intestine , where - pron - cause infection .
sign and symptom begin within seven to ten day after ingestion .
base on limit datum , - pron - appear to be seasonal in way that differ regionally and that be poorly understood . [ one  nine ]
some individual do not develop sign or symptom .
those who do may exhibit explosive and watery diarrhea , fever , nausea , vomiting , cramp , loss of appetite , fatigue , and bloating .
these symptom may last for month without treatment .
trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole be the recommend treatment .
microscopic examination be use for diagnosis .
a stool o and p examination may be helpful .
the oocyst have a distinctive blue halo when view use ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy ( figure two  four  .  three  zero ) .
figure two  four  .  three  zero
cyclospora cayetanensis be autofluorescent under ultraviolet light .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

which protozoan gi infection be common in the united states ?
protozoan gastrointestinal infections
protozoan gi infection be generally transmit through contaminate food or water , trigger diarrhea and vomiting that can lead to dehydration .
rehydration therapy be an important aspect of treatment , but most protozoan gi infection can also be treat with drug that target protozoan .
disease profile one  nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
cyclosporiasis faq for health professionals .
"
update june one  three , two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / cyclosporiasis / health_professionals / hp - faqs . html .
one  zero  nine  two chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  three  one
two  four  .  six helminthic infections of the gastrointestinal tract learning objectives
 identify the most common helminth that cause infection of the gi tract
 compare the major characteristic of specific helminthic disease affect gi tract helminth be widespread intestinal parasite .
these parasite can be divide into three common group  roundbodie worm also describe as nematode , flat - bodied worm that be segment ( also describe as cestode ) , and flat - bodied worm that be non - segmented ( also describe as trematode ) .
the nematode include roundworm , pinworm , hookworm , and whipworm .
cestode include beef , pork , and fish tapeworm .
trematode be collectively call fluke and more uniquely identify with the body site where the adult fluke be locate .
although infection can have serious consequence , many of these parasite be so well adapted to the human host that there be little obvious disease .
chapter two  four

digestive system infections one  zero  nine  three ascariasis infections cause by the large nematode roundworm ascaris lumbricoide , a soil - transmit helminth , be call ascariasis .
over eight  zero  zero million to one billion people be estimate to be infect worldwide . [ two  zero ]
infection be most common in warm climate and at warm time of year .
at present , infection be uncommon in the united states .
the egg of the worm be transmit through contaminate food and water .
this may happen if food be grow in contaminate soil , include when manure be use as fertilizer .
when an individual consume embryonate egg ( those with a develop embryo ) , the egg travel to the intestine and the larvae be able to hatch .
ascaris be able to produce protease that allow for penetration and degradation of host tissue .
the juvenile worm can then enter the circulatory system and migrate to the lung where - pron - enter the alveoli ( air sac ) .
from here - pron - crawl to the pharynx and then follow the gut luman to return to the small intestine , where - pron - mature into adult roundworm .
female in the host will produce and release egg that leave the host via fece .
in some case , the worm can block duct such as those of the pancrea or gallbladder .
the infection be commonly asymptomatic .
when sign and symptom be present , - pron - include shortness of breath , cough , nausea , diarrhea , blood in the stool , abdominal pain , weight loss , and fatigue .
the roundworm may be visible in the stool .
in severe case , child with substantial infection may experience intestinal blockage .
the egg can be identify by microscopic examination of the stool ( figure two  four  .  three  two ) .
in some case , the worm - pron - may be identify if cough up or excrete in stool .
- pron - can also sometimes be identify by x - ray , ultrasound , or mri .
ascariasis be self - limit , but can last one to two year because the worm can inhibit the body 's inflammatory response through glycan gimmickry ( see virulence factors of eukaryotic pathogens ) .
the first line of treatment be mebendazole or albendazole .
in some severe case , surgery may be require .
figure two  four  .  three  two ( a )
adult ascaris lumbricoide roundworm can cause intestinal blockage .
( b )
this mass of a . lumbricoide worm be excrete by a child .
( c )
a micrograph of a fertilized egg of a . lumbricoide .
fertilize egg can be distinguish from unfertilized egg because - pron - be round rather than elongate and have a thick cell wall .
( credit a  modification of work by south african medical research council  credit b  modification of work by james gathany , centers for disease control and prevention  credit c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

describe the route by which a . lumbricoide reach the host 's intestine as an adult worm .
two  zero .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
parasites – ascariasis .
"
update may two  four , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / ascariasis / index . html .
one  zero  nine  four chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five hookworm
two specie of nematode worm be associate with hookworm infection .
both specie be find in the americas , africa , and asia .
necator americanu be find predominantly in the united states and australia .
another species , ancylostoma doudenale , be find in southern europe , north africa , the middle east , and asia .
the egg of these specie develop into larvae in soil contaminate by dog or cat fece .
these larvae can penetrate the skin .
after travel through the venous circulation , - pron - reach the lung .
when - pron - be cough up , - pron - be then swallow and can enter the intestine and develop into mature adult .
at this stage , - pron - attach to the wall of the intestine , where - pron - feed on blood and can potentially cause anemia .
sign and symptom include cough , an itchy rash , loss of appetite , abdominal pain , and diarrhea .
in child , hookworm can affect physical and cognitive growth .
some hookworm specie , such as ancylostoma braziliense that be commonly find in animal such as cat and dog , can penetrate human skin and migrate , cause cutaneous larva migran , a skin disease cause by the larvae of hookworm .
as - pron - move across the skin , in the subcutaneous tissue , pruritic track appear ( figure two  four  .  three  three ) .
the infection be diagnose use microscopic examination of the stool , allow for observation of egg in the fece .
medication such as albendazole , mebendazole , and pyrantel pamoate be use as need to treat systemic infection .
in addition to systemic medication for symptom associate with cutaneous larva migran , topical thiabendazole be apply to the affect area .
figure two  four  .  three  three
( a )
this animal hookworm , ancylostoma caninum , be attach to the intestinal wall .
( b )
the track of hookworm be visible in this individual with cutaneous larva migran .
( c )
this micrograph show the microscopic egg of a hookworm .
( credit a , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
strongyloidiasis strongyloidiasis be generally cause by strongyloides stercorali , a soil - transmit helminth with both free - living and parasitic form .
in the parasitic form , the larvae of these nematode generally penetrate the body through the skin , especially through bare foot , although transmission through organ transplantation or at facility like day - care center can also occur .
when excrete in the stool , larvae can become free - live adult rather than develop into the parasitic form .
these free - living worm reproduce , lay egg that hatch into larvae that can develop into the parasitic form .
in the parasitic life cycle , infective larvae enter the skin , generally through the foot .
the larvae reach the circulatory system , which allow - pron - to travel to the alveolar space of the lung .
- pron - be transport to the pharynx where , like many other helminth , the infect patient cough - pron - up and swallow - pron - again so that - pron - return to the intestine .
once - pron - reach the intestine , female live in the epithelium and produce egg that develop asexually , unlike the free - living form , which use sexual reproduction .
the larvae may be excrete in the stool or can reinfect the host by enter the tissue of the intestine and skin around the anus , which can lead to chronic infection .
the condition be generally asymptomatic , although severe symptom can develop after treatment with corticosteroid for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , or follow other form of immunosuppression .
when the immune system be suppress , the rate of autoinfection increase , and huge amount of larvae migrate to organ chapter two  four  digestive system infections one  zero  nine  five throughout the body .
sign and symptom be generally nonspecific .
the condition can cause a rash at the site of skin entry , cough ( dry or with blood ) , fever , nausea , difficulty breathing , bloating , pain , heartburn , and , rarely , arthritis , or cardiac or kidney complication .
disseminated strongyloidiasis or hyperinfection be a life - threaten form of the disease that can occur , usually follow immunosuppression such as that cause by glucocorticoid treatment ( most commonly ) , with other immunosuppressive medication , with hiv infection , or with malnutrition .
as with other helminth , direct examination of the stool be important in diagnosis .
ideally , this should be continue over seven day .
serological testing , include antigen testing , be also available .
these can be limit by crossreaction with other similar parasite and by the inability to distinguish current from resolve infection .
ivermectin be the preferred treatment , with albendazole as a secondary option .

how do an acute infection of s . stercorali become chronic ?
pinworm ( enterobiasis ) enterobius vermicularis , commonly call pinworm , be tiny ( two – one  three mm ) nematode that cause enterobiasis .
of all helminthic infection , enterobiasis be the most common in the united states , affect as many as one - third of american children . [ two  one ]
although the sign and symptom be generally mild , patient may experience abdominal pain and insomnia from itch of the perianal region , which frequently occur at night when worm leave the anus to lay egg .
the itch contribute to transmission , as the disease be transmit through the fecal - oral route .
when an infected individual scratch the anal area , egg may get under the fingernail and later be deposit near the individual 's mouth , cause reinfection , or on fomite , where - pron - can be transfer to new host .
after be ingest , the larvae hatch within the small intestine and then take up residence in the colon and develop into adult .
from the colon , the female adult exit the body at night to lay egg ( figure two  four  .  three  four ) .
infection be diagnose in any of three way .
first , because the worm emerge at night to lay egg , - pron - be possible to inspect the perianal region for worm while an individual be asleep .
an alternative be to use transparent tape to remove egg from the area around the anus first thing in the morning for three day to yield egg for microscopic examination .
finally , - pron - may be possible to detect egg through examination of sample from under the fingernail , where egg may lodge due to scratch .
once diagnosis have be make , mebendazole , albendazole , and pyrantel pamoate be effective for treatment .
two  one .
" roundworm .
”
university of maryland medical center medical reference guide .
last review december nine , two  zero  one  four .
https / / umm . edu / health / medical / altmed / condition / roundworm .
one  zero  nine  six chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  three  four ( a ) e . vermicularis be tiny nematode commonly call pinworm .
( b )
this micrograph show pinworm egg .
trichuriasis
the nematode whipworm trichuris trichiura be a parasite that be transmit by ingestion from soil - contaminate hand or food and cause trichuriasis .
infection be most common in warm environment , especially when there be poor sanitation and great risk of fecal contamination of soil , or when food be grow in soil use manure as a fertilizer .
the sign and symptom may be minimal or nonexistent .
when a substantial infection develop , sign and symptom include painful , frequent diarrhea that may contain mucus and blood .
- pron - be possible for the infection to cause rectal prolapse , a condition in which a portion of the rectum become detach from the inside of the body and protrude from the anus ( figure two  four  .  three  five ) .
severely infect child may experience reduced growth and - pron - cognitive development may be affect .
when fertilize egg be ingest , - pron - travel to the intestine and the larvae emerge , take up residence in the wall of the colon and cecum .
- pron - attach - pron - with part of - pron - body embed in the mucosa .
the larvae mature and live in the cecum and ascend colon .
after six  zero to seven  zero day , female begin to lay three  zero  zero  zero to two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero egg per day .
diagnosis involve examination of the fece for the presence of egg .
- pron - may be necessary to use concentration technique and to collect specimen on multiple day .
follow diagnosis , the infection may be treat with mebendazole , albendazole , or ivermectin .
figure two  four  .  three  five
( a )
this adult female trichuris whipworm be a soil - transmit parasite .
( b ) trichuris trichiura egg be ingest and travel to the intestine where the larvae emerge and take up residence .
( c ) rectal prolapse be a condition that can result from whipworm infection .
- pron - occur when the rectum lose - pron - attachment to the internal body structure and protrude from the anus .
( credit a , b , c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chapter two  four

digestive system infections one  zero  nine  seven
trichinosis trichinosis ( trichenellosis ) develop follow consumption of food that contain trichinella spiralis ( most commonly ) or other trichinella specie .
these microscopic nematode worm be most commonly transmit in meat , especially pork , that have not be cook thoroughly .
t . spiralis larvae in meat emerge from cyst when expose to acid and pepsin in the stomach .
- pron - develop into mature adult within the large intestine .
the larvae produce in the large intestine be able to migrate into the muscle mechanically via the stylet of the parasite , form cyst .
muscle protein be reduce in abundance or undetectable in cell that contain trichinella ( nurse cell ) .
animal that ingest the cyst from other animal can later develop infection ( figure two  four  .  three  six ) .
although infection may be asymptomatic , symptomatic infection begin within a day or two of consume the nematode .
abdominal symptom arise first and can include diarrhea , constipation , and abdominal pain .
other possible symptom include headache , light sensitivity , muscle pain , fever , cough , chill , and conjunctivitis .
more severe symptom affect motor coordination , breathing , and the heart sometimes occur .
- pron - may take month for the symptom to resolve , and the condition be occasionally fatal .
mild case may be mistake for influenza or similar condition .
infection be diagnose use clinical history , muscle biopsy to look for larvae , and serological testing , include immunoassay .
enzyme immunoassay be the most common test .
- pron - be difficult to effectively treat larvae that have form cyst in the muscle , although medication may help .
- pron - be good to begin treatment as soon as possible because medication such as mebendazole and albendazole be effective in kill only the adult worm in the intestine .
steroid may be use to reduce inflammation if larvae be in the muscle .
figure two  four  .  three  six
( a )
this image show larvae of t . spiralis within muscle .
( b )
in meat , the larvae have a characteristic coiled appearance , as see in this partially digest larva in bear meat .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

compare and contrast the transmission of pinworm and whipworm .
tapeworm ( taeniasis ) taeniasis be a tapeworm infection , generally cause by pork ( taenia solium ) , beef ( taenia saginata ) , and asian one  zero  nine  eight
chapter two  four 
digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five ( taenia asiatica ) tapeworm find in undercooked meat .
consumption of raw or undercooked fish , include contaminate sushi , can also result in infection from the fish tapeworm ( diphyllobothrium latum ) .
tapeworm be flatworm ( cestode ) with multiple body segment and a head call a scolex that attach to the intestinal wall .
tapeworm can become quite large , reach four to eight meter long ( figure two  four  .  three  seven ) .
figure five  .  two  three illustrate the life cycle of a tapeworm .
figure two  four  .  three  seven ( a )
an adult tapeworm use the scolex to attach to the intestinal wall .
( b )
the egg of a pork tapeworm ( taenia solium ) be visible in this micrograph .
( credit a , b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
tapeworm attach to the intestinal wall produce egg that be excrete in fece .
after ingestion by animal , the egg hatch and the larvae emerge .
- pron - may take up residence in the intestine , but can sometimes move to other tissue , especially muscle or brain tissue .
when t . solium larvae form cyst in tissue , the condition be call cysticercosis .
this occur through ingestion of egg via the fecal - oral route , not through consumption of undercooked meat .
- pron - can develop in the muscle , eye ( ophthalmic cysticercosis ) , or brain ( neurocysticercosis ) .
infection may be asymptomatic or - pron - may cause mild gastrointestinal symptom such as epigastric discomfort , nausea , diarrhea , flatulence , or hunger pain .
- pron - be also common to find visible tapeworm segment pass in the stool .
in case of cysticercosis , symptom differ depend upon where the cyst become establish .
neurocysticercosis can have severe , life - threaten consequence and be associate with headache and seizure because of the presence of the tapeworm larvae encyste in the brain .
cyst in muscle may be asymptomatic , or - pron - may be painful .
to diagnose these condition , microscopic analysis of stool sample from three separate day be generally recommend .
egg or body segment , call proglottid , may be visible in these sample .
molecular method have be develop but be not yet widely available .
image , such as ct and mri , may be use to detect cyst .
praziquantel or niclosamide be use for treatment .
what 's in - pron - sushi roll ?
as food that contain raw fish , such as sushi and sashimi , continue to increase in popularity throughout the world , so do the risk of parasitic infection carry by raw or undercooked fish .
diphyllobothrium specie , know as fish tapeworm , be one of the main culprit .
evidence suggest that undercooked salmon cause an increase in diphyllobothrium infection in british columbia in the one  nine  seven  zero and early one  nine  eight  zero .
in the year since , the number of report case in the united states and canada have be low , but - pron - be likely that case be underreported because the causative agent be not easily recognized . [ two  two ]
another illness transmit in undercooked fish be herre worm disease , or anisakiasis , in which nematode micro connections chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  zero  nine  nine attach to the epithelium of the esophagus , stomach , or small intestine .
case have increase around the world as raw fish consumption have increased . [ two  three ]
although the message may be unpopular with sushi lover , fish should be freeze or cook before eat .
the extremely low and high temperature associate with freeze and cooking kill worm and larvae contain in the meat , thereby prevent infection .
ingest fresh , raw sushi may make for a delightful meal , but - pron - also entail some risk .
hydatid disease
another cestode , echinococcus granulosus , cause a serious infection know as hydatid disease ( cystic echinococcosis ) .
e . granulosus be find in dog ( the definitive host ) , as well as several intermediate host ( sheep , pig , goat , cattle ) .
the cestode be transmit through egg in the fece from infected animal , which can be an occupational hazard for individual who work in agriculture .
once ingest , e . granulosus egg hatch in the small intestine and release the larvae .
the larvae invade the intestinal wall to gain access to the circulatory system .
- pron - form hydatid cyst in internal organ , especially in the lung and liver , that grow slowly and be often undetected until - pron - become large .
if the cyst burst , a severe allergic reaction ( anaphylaxis ) may occur .
cyst present in the liver can cause enlargement of the liver , nausea , vomiting , right epigastric pain , pain in the right upper quadrant , and possible allergic sign and symptom .
cyst in the lung can lead to alveolar disease .
abdominal pain , weight loss , pain , and malaise may occur , and inflammatory process develop .
e . granulosus can be detect through imaging ( ultrasonography , ct , mri ) that show the cyst .
serologic test , include elisa and indirect hemagglutinin test , be use .
cystic disease be most effectively treat with surgery to remove cyst , but other treatment be also available , include chemotherapy with anti - helminthic drug ( albendazole or mebendazole ) .

describe the risk of the cyst associate with taeniasis and hydatid disease .
flukes flukes be flatworm that have a leaflike appearance .
- pron - be a type of trematode worm , and multiple specie be associate with disease in human .
the most common be liver fluke and intestinal fluke
( figure two  four  .  three  eight ) .
two  two .
nancy craig .
“
fish tapeworm and sushi .
"
canadian family physician five  eight ( two  zero  one  two ) six  pp .
six  five  four – six  five  eight .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / article / pmc three  three  seven  four  six  eight  eight  / . two  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
anisakiasis faq .
"
update november one  two , two  zero  one  two .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / anisakiasis / faqs . html .
one  one  zero  zero chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  three  eight
( a )
a liver fluke infect the bile duct .
( b )
an intestinal fluke infect the intestine .
( credit a  modification of work by shafiei r , sarkari b , sadjjadi sm , mowlavi gr , and moshfe a  credit b  modification of work by georgia division of public health )
liver flukes
the liver fluke be several specie of trematode that cause disease by interfere with the bile duct .
fascioliasis be cause by fasciola hepatica and fasciola gigantica in contaminate raw or undercooked aquatic plant ( e . g . , watercress ) .
in fasciola infection , adult fluke develop in the bile duct and release egg into the fece .
clonochiasis be cause by clonorchis sinensis in contaminate freshwater fish .
other fluke , such as opisthorchis viverrini ( find in fish ) and opisthorchis felineus ( find in freshwater snail ) , also cause infection .
liver fluke spend part of - pron - life cycle in freshwater snail , which serve as an intermediate host .
human be typically infect after eat aquatic plant contaminate by the infective larvae after - pron - have leave the snail .
once - pron - reach the human intestine , - pron - migrate back to the bile duct , where - pron - mature .
the life cycle be similar for the other infectious liver fluke , ( see figure five  .  two  two ) .
when fasciola fluke cause acute infection , sign and symptom include nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , rash , fever , malaise , and breathe difficulty .
if the infection become chronic , with adult fluke live in the bile duct , then cholangitis , cirrhosis , pancreatitis , cholecystitis , and gallstone may develop .
symptom be similar for infection by other liver fluke .
cholangiocarcinoma can occur from c . sinensis infection .
the opisthorchis specie can also be associate with cancer development .
diagnosis be accomplish use patient history and examination of sample from fece or other sample ( such as vomitus ) .
because the egg may appear similar , immunoassay technique be available that can help distinguish specie .
the preferred treatment for fascioliasis be triclabendazole .
c . sinensis and opisthorchis spp .
infection be treat with praziquantel or albendazole .
intestinal flukes
the intestinal fluke be trematode that develop in the intestine .
many , such as fasciolopsis buski , which cause fasciolopsiasis , be closely relate to liver fluke .
intestinal fluke be ingest from contaminate aquatic plant that have not be properly cook .
when the cyst be consume , the larvae emerge in the duodenum and develop into adult while attach to the intestinal epithelium .
the egg be release in stool .
intestinal fluke infection be often asymptomatic , but some case may involve mild diarrhea and abdominal pain .
more severe symptom such as vomiting , nausea , allergic reaction , and anemia can sometimes occur , and high parasite load may sometimes lead to intestinal obstruction .
diagnosis be the same as with liver fluke  examination of fece or other sample and immunoassay .
praziquantel be use to treat infection cause by intestinal fluke .
chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  one  zero  one
 how be fluke transmit ?
helminthic gastrointestinal infections numerous helminth be capable of colonize the gi tract .
many such infection be asymptomatic , but other may cause sign and symptom range from mild gi stress to severe systemic infection .
helminth have complex and unique life cycle that dictate - pron - specific mode of transmission .
most helminthic infection can be treat with medication .
disease profile one  one  zero  two chapter two  four

digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  four  .  three  nine chapter two  four
 digestive system infections one  one  zero  three figure two  four  .  four  zero resolution carli 's doctor explain that - pron - have bacterial gastroenteritis cause by salmonella bacteria .
the source of these bacteria be likely the undercooked egg .
have the egg be fully cook , the high temperature would have be sufficient to kill any salmonella in or on the egg .
in this case , enough bacteria survive to cause an infection once the egg be eat .
carli 's sign and symptom continue to worsen .
- pron - fever become high , - pron - vomiting and diarrhea continue , and - pron - begin to become dehydrated .
- pron - feel thirsty all the time and have continual abdominal cramp .
carli 's doctor treat - pron - with intravenous fluid to help with - pron - dehydration , but do not prescribe antibiotic .
carli 's parent be confused because - pron - think a bacterial infection should always be treat with antibiotic .
the doctor explain that the bad medical problem for carli be dehydration .
except in the most vulnerable clinical focus one  one  zero  four chapter two  four  digestive system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and sick patient , such as those with hiv / aids , antibiotic do not reduce recovery time or improve outcome in salmonella infection .
in fact , antibiotic can actually delay the natural excretion of bacteria from the body .
rehydration therapy replenish lose fluid , diminish the effect of dehydration and improve the patient 's condition while the infection resolve .
after two day of rehydration therapy , carli 's sign and symptom begin to fade .
- pron - be still somewhat thirsty , but the amount of urine - pron - pass become large and the color light .
- pron - stop vomit .
- pron - fever be go , and so be the diarrhea .
at that point , stool analysis find very few salmonella bacteria .
in one week , carli be discharge as fully recover .
go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary two  four  .  one anatomy and normal microbiota of the digestive system

the digestive tract , consist of the oral cavity , pharynx , esophagus , stomach , small intestine , and large intestine , have a normal microbiota that be important for health .

the constant movement of material through the gastrointestinal canal , the protective layer of mucus , the normal microbiota , and the harsh chemical environment in the stomach and small intestine help to prevent colonization by pathogen .

infections or microbial toxin in the oral cavity can cause tooth decay , periodontal disease , and various type of ulcer .

infections and intoxication of the gastrointestinal tract can cause general symptom such as nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , and fever .
localized inflammation of the gi tract can result in gastritis , enteritis , gastroenteritis , hepatitis , or colitis , and damage to epithelial cell of the colon can lead to dysentery .

foodborne illness refer to infection or intoxication that originate with pathogen or toxin ingest in contaminate food or water .
two  four  .  two microbial diseases of the mouth and oral cavity 
dental carie , tartar , and gingiviti be cause by overgrowth of oral bacteria , usually streptococcus and actinomyces specie , as a result of insufficient dental hygiene .

gingivitis can worsen , allow porphyromonas , streptococcus , and actinomyces specie to spread and cause periodontitis .
when prevotella intermedia , fusobacterium specie , and treponema vicentii be involve , - pron - can lead to acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis .

the herpe simplex virus type one can cause lesion of the mouth and throat call herpetic gingivostomatitis .

other infection of the mouth include oral thrush , a fungal infection cause by overgrowth of candida yeast , and mump , a viral infection of the salivary gland cause by the mump virus , a paramyxovirus .
two  four  .  three bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract 
major cause of gastrointestinal illness include salmonella spp .
, staphylococcus spp .
, helicobacter pylorus , clostridium perfringen ,
clostridium difficile , bacillus cereus , and yersinia bacteria .
 c . difficile be an important cause of hospital acquire infection .
 vibrio cholerae cause cholera , which can be a severe diarrheal illness .

different strain of e . coli , include etec , epec , eiec , and ehec , cause different illness with vary degree of severity .
 h . pylorus be associate with peptic ulcer .

salmonella enterica serotype can cause typhoid fever , a more severe illness than salmonellosis .

rehydration and other supportive therapy be often use as general treatment .
chapter two  four

digestive system infections one  one  zero  five

careful antibiotic use be require to reduce the risk of cause c . difficile infection and when treat antibiotic - resistant infection .
two  four  .  four viral infections of the gastrointestinal tract

common viral cause of gastroenteriti include rotavirus , noroviruse , and astroviruse .

hepatitis may be cause by several unrelated virus  hepatitis virus
a , b , c , d , and e . 
the hepatitis virus differ in - pron - mode of transmission , treatment , and potential for chronic infection .
two  four  .  five protozoan infections of the gastrointestinal tract
 giardiasis , cryptosporidiosis , amoebiasis , and cyclosporiasis be intestinal infection cause by protozoan .

protozoan intestinal infection be commonly transmit through contaminate food and water .

treatment vary depend on the causative agent , so proper diagnosis be important .

microscopic examination of stool or biopsy specimen be often use in diagnosis , in combination with other approach .
two  four  .  six helminthic infections of the gastrointestinal tract

helminth often cause intestinal infection after transmission to human through exposure to contaminate soil , water , or food .
sign and symptom be often mild , but severe complication may develop in some case .

ascaris lumbricoide egg be transmit through contaminate food or water and hatch in the intestine .
juvenile larvae travel to the lung and then to the pharynx , where - pron - be swallow and return to the intestine to mature .
these nematode roundworm cause ascariasis .

necator americanu and ancylostoma doudenale cause hookworm infection when larvae penetrate the skin from soil contaminate by dog or cat fece .
- pron - travel to the lung and be then swallow to mature in the intestine .

strongyloides stercorali be transmit from soil through the skin to the lung and then to the intestine where - pron - cause strongyloidiasis .

enterobius vermicularis be nematode pinworm transmit by the fecal - oral route .
after ingestion , - pron - travel to the colon where - pron - cause enterobiasis .

trichuris trichiura can be transmit through soil or fecal contamination and cause trichuriasis .
after ingestion , the egg travel to the intestine where the larvae emerge and mature , attach to the wall of the colon and cecum .

trichinella spp . be transmit through undercooked meat .
larvae in the meat emerge from cyst and mature in the large intestine .
- pron - can migrate to the muscle and form new cyst , cause trichinosis .

taenia spp .
and diphyllobothrium latum be tapeworm transmit through undercooked food or the fecaloral route .
taenia infection cause taeniasis .
tapeworm use - pron - scolex to attach to the intestinal wall .
larvae may also move to muscle or brain tissue .

echinococcus granulosus be a cestode transmit through egg in the fece of infect animal , especially dog .
after ingestion , egg hatch in the small intestine , and the larvae invade the intestinal wall and travel through the circulatory system to form dangerous cyst in internal organ , cause hydatid disease .

flukes be transmit through aquatic plant or fish .
liver flukes cause disease by interfere with the bile duct .
intestinal fluke develop in the intestine , where - pron - attach to the intestinal epithelium .
chapter two  five circulatory and lymphatic system infections figure two  five  .  one yellow fever be a viral hemorrhagic disease that can cause liver damage , result in jaundice ( leave ) as well as serious and sometimes fatal complication .
the virus that cause yellow fever be transmit through the bite of a biological vector , the aedes aegypti mosquito ( right ) .
( credit leave  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit right 
modification of work by james gathany , centers for disease control and prevention ) chapter outline two  five  .  one anatomy of the circulatory and lymphatic systems two  five  .  two bacterial infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems two  five  .  three viral infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
two  five  .  four parasitic infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems introduction yellow fever be once common in the southeastern us , with annual outbreak of more than two  five  ,  zero  zero  zero infection in new orleans in the mid -  one  eight  zero  zero s . [ one ]
in the early two  zero th century , effort to eradicate the virus that cause yellow fever be successful thank to vaccination program and effective control ( mainly through the insecticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane [ ddt ] ) of aedes aegypti , the mosquito that serve as a vector .
today , the virus have be largely eradicate in north america .
elsewhere , effort to contain yellow fever have be less successful .
despite mass vaccination campaign in some region , the risk for yellow fever epidemic be rise in dense urban city in africa and south america . [ two ]
in an increasingly globalized society , yellow fever could easily make a comeback in north america , where a . aegypti be still present .
if these mosquito be expose to infect individual , new outbreak would be possible .
like yellow fever , many of the circulatory and lymphatic disease discuss in this chapter be emerge or reemerge worldwide .
despite medical advance , disease like malaria , ebola , and other could become endemic in the us give the right circumstance .
one .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
the history of yellow fever .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / travel - training / local / historyepidemiologyandvaccination / page two  seven  five  six  eight  . html two .
c . l . gardner , k . d . ryman .
“ yellow fever  a reemerging threat .
"
clinical laboratory medicine three  zero
no .
one
( two  zero  one  zero  )  two  three  seven – two  six  zero .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  one  one
two  five  .  one anatomy of the circulatory and lymphatic systems learning objectives
 describe the major anatomical feature of the circulatory and lymphatic system 
explain why the circulatory and lymphatic system lack normal microbiota 
explain how microorganism overcome defense of the circulatory and lymphatic system to cause infection 
describe general sign and symptom of disease associate with infection of the circulatory and lymphatic system the circulatory and lymphatic system be network of vessel and a pump that transport blood and lymph , respectively , throughout the body .
when these system be infect with a microorganism , the network of vessel can facilitate the rapid dissemination of the microorganism to other region of the body , sometimes with serious result .
in this section , - pron - will examine some of the key anatomical feature of the circulatory and lymphatic system , as well as general sign and symptom of infection .
the circulatory system
the circulatory ( or cardiovascular ) system be a closed network of organ and vessel that move blood around the body ( figure two  five  .  two ) .
the primary purpose of the circulatory system be to deliver nutrient , immune factor , and oxygen to tissue and to carry away waste product for elimination .
the heart be a four - chambered pump that propel the blood throughout the body .
deoxygenated blood enter the right atrium through the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava after return from the body .
the blood next pass through the tricuspid valve to enter the right ventricle .
when the heart contract , the blood from the right ventricle be pump through the pulmonary artery to the lung .
there , the blood be oxygenate at the alveoli and return to the heart through the pulmonary vein .
the oxygenated blood be receive at the left atrium and proceed through the mitral valve to the left ventricle .
when the heart contract , the oxygenated blood be pump throughout the body via a series of thick - walled vessel call artery .
the first and large artery be call the aorta .
the artery sequentially branch and decrease in size ( and be call arteriole ) until - pron - end in a network of small vessel call capillary .
the capillary bed be locate in the interstitial space within tissue and release nutrient , immune factor , and oxygen to those tissue .
the capillary connect to a series of vessel call venule , which increase in size to form the vein .
the vein join together into large vessel as - pron - transfer blood back to the heart .
the large vein , the superior and inferior vena cava , return part one barbara be a four  three  - year - old patient who have be diagnose with metastatic inflammatory breast cancer .
to facilitate - pron - ongoing chemotherapy , - pron - physician implant a port attach to a central venous catheter .
at a recent checkup , - pron - report feel restless and complain that the site of the catheter have become uncomfortable .
after remove the dressing , the physician observe that the surgical site appear red and be warm to the touch , suggest a localize infection .
barbara 's be also run a fever of three  eight  .  two ° c ( one  zero  zero  .  eight ° f ) .
- pron - physician treat the affected area with a topical antiseptic and apply a fresh dressing .
- pron - also prescribe a course of the antibiotic oxacillin .

base on this information , what factor likely contribute to barbara 's condition ?

what be the most likely source of the microbe involve ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  one  one  two
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five the blood to the right atrium .
figure two  five  .  two
the major component of the human circulatory system include the heart , artery , vein , and capillary .
this network deliver blood to the body 's organ and tissue .
( credit top left  modification of work by mariana ruiz villareal  credit bottom right  modification of work by bruce blaus )
other organ play important role in the circulatory system as well .
the kidney filter the blood , remove waste product and eliminate - pron - in the urine .
the liver also filter the blood and remove damage or defective red blood cell .
the spleen filter and store blood , remove damage red blood cell , and be a reservoir for immune factor .
all of these filter structure serve as site for entrapment of microorganism and help maintain an environment free of microorganism in the blood .
the lymphatic system
the lymphatic system be also a network of vessel that run throughout the body ( figure two  five  .  three ) .
however , these vessel do not form a full circulating system and be not pressurize by the heart .
rather , the lymphatic system be an open system with the fluid move in one direction from the extremity toward two drainage point into vein
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  one  three just above the heart .
lymphatic fluid move more slowly than blood because - pron - be not pressurize .
small lymph capillary interact with blood capillary in the interstitial space in tissue .
fluid from the tissue enter the lymph capillary and be drain away ( figure two  five  .  four ) .
these fluid , term lymph , also contain large number of white blood cell .
figure two  five  .  three
the essential component of the human lymphatic system drain fluid away from tissue .
one  one  one  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  five  .  four
blood enter the capillary from an arteriole ( red ) and leave through venule ( blue ) .
interstitial fluid may drain into the lymph capillary ( green ) and proceed to lymph node .
( credit  modification of work by national cancer institute , national institutes of health )
the lymphatic system contain two type of lymphoid tissue .
the primary lymphoid tissue include bone marrow and the thymus .
bone marrow contain the hematopoietic stem cell ( hsc ) that differentiate and mature into the various type of blood cell and lymphocyte ( see figure one  seven  .  one  two ) .
the secondary lymphoid tissue include the spleen , lymph node , and several area of diffuse lymphoid tissue underlie epithelial membrane .
the spleen , an encapsulate structure , filter blood and capture pathogen and antigen that pass into - pron - ( figure two  five  .  five ) .
the spleen contain specialized macrophage and dendritic cell that be crucial for antigen presentation , a mechanism critical for activation of t lymphocyte and b lymphocyte ( see major histocompatibility complexes and antigen - presenting cells ) .
lymph node be bean - shape organ situate throughout the body .
these structure contain area call germinal center that be rich in b and t lymphocyte .
the lymph node also contain macrophage and dendritic cell for antigen presentation .
lymph from nearby tissue enter the lymph node through afferent lymphatic vessel and encounter these lymphocyte as - pron - pass through  the lymph exit the lymph node through the efferent lymphatic vessel ( figure two  five  .  five ) .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  one  five figure two  five  .  five ( a )
the spleen be a lymphatic organ locate in the upper leave quadrant of the abdoman near the stomach and leave kidney .
- pron - contain numerous phagocyte and lymphocyte that combat and prevent circulatory infection by kill and remove pathogen from the blood .
( b ) lymph node be mass of lymphatic tissue locate along the large lymph vessel .
- pron - contain numerous lymphocyte that kill and remove pathogen from lymphatic fluid that drain from surround tissue .
the lymphatic system filter fluid that have accumulate in tissue before - pron - be return to the blood .
a brief overview of this process be provide at this ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two lymphatic ) website .

what be the main function of the lymphatic system ?
infection of the circulatory system
under normal circumstance , the circulatory system and the blood should be sterile  the circulatory system have no normal microbiota .
because the system be closed , there be no easy portal of entry into the circulatory system for microbe .
those that be able to breach the body 's physical barrier and enter the bloodstream encounter a host of circulate immune defense , such as antibody , complement protein , phagocyte , and other immune cell .
microbe often gain access to the circulatory system through a break in the skin ( e . g . , wound , needle , intravenous catheter , insect bite ) or spread to the circulatory system from infection in other body site .
for example , microorganism cause pneumonia or renal infection may enter the local circulation of the lung or kidney and spread from there throughout the circulatory network .
if microbe in the bloodstream be not quickly eliminate , - pron - can spread rapidly throughout the body , lead to serious , even life - threaten infection .
various term be use to describe condition involve microbe in the link to learn one  one  one  six chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five circulatory system .
the term bacteremia refer to bacteria in the blood .
if bacteria be reproduce in the blood as - pron - spread , this condition be call septicemia .
the presence of virus in the blood be call viremia .
microbial toxin can also be spread through the circulatory system , cause a condition term toxemia .
microbe and microbial toxin in the blood can trigger an inflammatory response so severe that the inflammation damage host tissue and organ more than the infection - pron - .
this counterproductive immune response be call systemic inflammatory response syndrome ( sirs ) , and - pron - can lead to the life - threaten condition know as sepsis .
sepsis be characterize by the production of excess cytokine that lead to classic sign of inflammation such as fever , vasodilation , and edema ( see inflammation and fever ) .
in a patient with sepsis , the inflammatory response become dysregulated and disproportionate to the threat of infection .
critical organ such as the heart , lung , liver , and kidney become dysfunctional , result in increase heart and respiratory rate , and disorientation .
if not treat promptly and effectively , patient with sepsis can go into shock and die .
certain infection can cause inflammation in the heart and blood vessel .
inflammation of the endocardium , the inner lining of the heart , be call endocarditis and can result in damage to the heart valve severe enough to require surgical replacement .
inflammation of the pericardium , the sac surround the heart , be call pericarditis .
the term myocarditis refer to the inflammation of the heart 's muscle tissue .
pericarditis and myocarditis can cause fluid to accumulate around the heart , result in congestive heart failure .
inflammation of blood vessel be call vasculitis .
although somewhat rare , vasculitis can cause blood vessel to become damaged and rupture  as blood be release , small red or purple spot call petechiae appear on the skin .
if the damage of tissue or blood vessel be severe , - pron - can result in reduced blood flow to the surround tissue .
this condition be call ischemia , and - pron - can be very serious .
in severe case , the affect tissue can die and become necrotic  these situation may require surgical debridement or amputation .

why do the circulatory system have no normal microbiota ?

explain why the presence of microbe in the circulatory system can lead to serious consequence .
infection of the lymphatic system like the circulatory system , the lymphatic system do not have a normal microbiota , and the large number of immune cell typically eliminate transient microbe before - pron - can establish an infection .
only microbe with an array of virulence factor be able to overcome these defense and establish infection in the lymphatic system .
however , when a localize infection begin to spread , the lymphatic system be often the first place the invade microbe can be detect .
infection in the lymphatic system also trigger an inflammatory response .
inflammation of lymphatic vessel , call lymphangitis , can produce visible red streak under the skin .
inflammation in the lymph node can cause - pron - to swell .
a swollen lymph node be refer to as a bubo , and the condition be refer to as lymphadenitis .
two  five  .  two bacterial infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems learning objectives
 identify and compare bacteria that most commonly cause infection of the circulatory and lymphatic system  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the circulatory and lymphatic system
bacteria can enter the circulatory and lymphatic system through acute infection or breach of the skin barrier or chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  one  seven mucosa .
breach may occur through fairly common occurrence , such as insect bite or small wound .
even the act of tooth brushing , which can cause small rupture in the gum , may introduce bacteria into the circulatory system .
in most case , the bacteremia that result from such common exposure be transient and remain below the threshold of detection .
in severe case , bacteremia can lead to septicemia with dangerous complication such as toxemia , sepsis , and septic shock .
in these situation , - pron - be often the immune response to the infection that result in the clinical sign and symptom rather than the microbe - pron - .
bacterial sepsis , septic and toxic shock
at low concentration , pro - inflammatory cytokine such as interleukin one ( il -  one ) and tumor necrosis factor - α ( tnf - α ) play important role in the host 's immune defense .
when - pron - circulate systemically in large amount , however , the result immune response can be life threaten .
il -  one induce vasodilation ( widen of blood vessel ) and reduce the tight junction between vascular endothelial cell , lead to widespread edema .
as fluid move out of circulation into tissue , blood pressure begin to drop .
if leave unchecked , the blood pressure can fall below the level necessary to maintain proper kidney and respiratory function , a condition know as septic shock .
in addition , the excessive release of cytokine during the inflammatory response can lead to the formation of blood clot .
the loss of blood pressure and occurrence of blood clot can result in multiple organ failure and death .
bacteria be the most common pathogen associate with the development of sepsis , and septic shock . [ three ]
the most common infection associate with sepsis be bacterial pneumonia ( see bacterial infections of the respiratory tract ) , account for about half of all case , follow by intra - abdominal infection ( bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract ) and urinary tract infection ( bacterial infections of the urinary system ) . [ four ] infections associate with superficial wound , animal bite , and indwell catheter may also lead to sepsis and septic shock .
these initially minor , localized infection can be cause by a wide range of different bacteria , include staphylococcus , streptococcus , pseudomonas , pasteurella , acinetobacter , and member of the enterobacteriaceae .
however , if leave untreated , infection by these gram - positive and gram - negative pathogen can potentially progress to sepsis , shock , and death .
toxic shock syndrome and streptococcal toxic shock - like syndrome toxemia associate with infection cause by staphylococcus aureus can cause staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome ( tss ) .
some strain of s . aureus produce a superantigen call toxic shock syndrome toxin -  one ( tsst -  one ) .
tss may occur as a complication of other localized or systemic infection such as pneumonia , osteomyelitis , sinusitis , and skin wound ( surgical , traumatic , or burn ) .
those at high risk for staphylococcal tss be woman with preexist s . aureus colonization of the vagina who leave tampon , contraceptive sponge , diaphragms , or other device in the vagina for long than the recommend time .
staphylococcal tss be characterize by sudden onset of vomiting , diarrhea , myalgia , body temperature high than three  eight  .  nine ° c ( one  zero  two  .  zero ° f ) , and rapid - onset hypotension with a systolic blood pressure less than nine  zero mm hg for adult  a diffuse erythematous rash that lead to peel and shed skin one to two week after onset  and additional involvement of three or more organ systems . [ five ]
the mortality rate associate with staphylococcal tss be less than three % of case .
diagnosis of staphylococcal tss be base on clinical sign , symptom , serologic test to confirm bacterial specie , and the detection of toxin production from staphylococcal isolate .
culture of skin and blood be often negative  less than five % be positive in case of staphylococcal tss .
treatment for staphylococcal tss include decontamination , debridement , vasopressor to elevate blood pressure , and antibiotic therapy with clindamycin plus vancomycin or daptomycin pende susceptibility result .
three .
s . p . larosa .
“
sepsis .
" two  zero  one  zero .
http / / www . clevelandclinicmeded . com / medicalpub / diseasemanagement / infectious - disease / sepsis / . four .
d . c . angus , t . van der poll .
“
severe sepsis and septic shock .
"
new england journal of medicine three  six  nine , no .
nine ( two  zero  one  three  )  eight  four  zero – eight  five  one .
five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
toxic shock syndrome ( other than streptococcal ) ( tss )
two  zero  one  one case definition .
" https / / wwwn . cdc . gov / nndss / condition / toxic - shock - syndrome - other - than - streptococcal / case - definition /  two  zero  one  one  / .
accessed july two  five , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  one  eight
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five a syndrome with sign and symptom similar to staphylococcal tss can be cause by streptococcus pyogene .
this condition , call streptococcal toxic shock - like syndrome ( stss ) , be characterize by more severe pathophysiology than staphylococcal tss , [ six ] with about five  zero % of patient develop s . pyogene bacteremia and necrotize fasciitis .
in contrast to staphylococcal tss , stss be more likely to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ards ) , a rapidly progressive disease characterize by fluid accumulation in the lung that inhibit breathe and cause hypoxemia ( low oxygen level in the blood ) .
stss be associate with a high mortality rate ( two  zero %– six  zero % ) , even with aggressive therapy .
stss usually develop in patient with a streptococcal soft - tissue infection such as bacterial cellulitis , necrotize fasciitis , pyomyositis ( pus formation in muscle cause by infection ) , a recent influenza a infection , or chickenpox .

how can large amount of pro - inflammatory cytokine lead to septic shock ?
part two despite oxacillin therapy , barbara 's condition continue to worsen over the next several day .
- pron - fever increase to four  zero  .  one ° c ( one  zero  four  .  two ° f ) and - pron - begin to experience chill , rapid breathing , and confusion .
- pron - doctor suspect bacteremia by a drug - resistant bacterium and admit barbara to the hospital .
culture of the surgical site and blood reveal staphylococcus aureus .
antibiotic susceptibility testing confirm that the isolate be methicillin - resistant s . aureus ( mrsa ) .
in response , barbara 's doctor change - pron - antibiotic therapy to vancomycin and arrange to have the port and venous catheter remove .

why do barbara 's infection not respond to oxacillin therapy ?

why do the physician have the port and catheter remove ?

base on the sign and symptom describe , what be some possible diagnosis for barbara 's condition ?
jump to the next clinical focus feature box .
go back to the previous clinical focus feature box .
puerperal sepsis a type of sepsis call puerperal sepsis , also know as puerperal infection , puerperal fever , or childbe fever , be a nosocomial infection associate with the period of puerperium - the time follow childbirth during which the mother 's reproductive system return to a nonpregnant state .
such infection may originate in the genital tract , breast , urinary tract , or a surgical wound .
initially the infection may be limit to the uterus or other local site of infection , but - pron - can quickly spread , result in peritonitis , septicemia , and death .
before the one  nine th century work of ignaz semmelweis and the widespread acceptance of germ theory ( see modern foundations of cell theory ) , puerperal sepsis be a major cause of mortality among new mother in the first few day follow childbirth .
puerperal sepsis be often associate with streptococcus pyogene , but numerous other bacteria can also be responsible .
example include gram - positive bacterial ( e . g . streptococcus spp .
, staphylococcus spp . , and enterococcus spp . ) , gram - negative bacteria ( e . g . chlamydia spp . , escherichia coli
, klebsiella spp . , and proteus spp . ) , as well as anaerobe such as peptostreptococcus spp .
, bacteroides spp . , and clostridium spp .
in case cause by s . pyogene , the bacteria attach to host tissue use m protein and produce a carbohydrate capsule to avoid phagocytosis .
s . pyogene also clinical focus six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome ( stss )
( streptococcus pyogene )
two  zero  one  zero case definition .
" https / / wwwn . cdc . gov / nndss / condition / streptococcal - toxic - shock - syndrome / case -
definition /  two  zero  one  zero  / . accessed july two  five , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  one  nine produce a variety of exotoxin , like streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin a and b , that be associate with virulence and may function as superantigen .
diagnosis of puerperal fever be base on the timing and extent of fever and isolation , and identification of the etiologic agent in blood , wound , or urine specimen .
because there be numerous possible cause , antimicrobial susceptibility testing must be use to determine the good antibiotic for treatment .
nosocomial incidence of puerperal fever can be greatly reduce through the use of antiseptic during delivery and strict adherence to handwash protocol by doctor , midwife , and nurse .
infectious arthritis also call septic arthritis , infectious arthritis can be either an acute or a chronic condition .
infectious arthritis be characterize by inflammation of joint tissue and be most often cause by bacterial pathogen .
most case of acute infectious arthritis be secondary to bacteremia , with a rapid onset of moderate to severe joint pain and swell that limit the motion of the affect joint .
in adult and young child , the infective pathogen be most often introduce directly through injury , such as a wound or a surgical site , and bring to the joint through the circulatory system .
acute infection may also occur after joint replacement surgery .
acute infectious arthritis often occur in patient with an immune system impair by other viral and bacterial infection .
s . aureus be the most common cause of acute septic arthritis in the general population of adult and young child .
neisseria gonorrhoeae be an important cause of acute infectious arthritis in sexually active individual .
chronic infectious arthritis be responsible for five % of all infectious arthritis case and be more likely to occur in patient with other illness or condition .
patient at risk include those who have an hiv infection , a bacterial or fungal infection , prosthetic joint , rheumatoid arthritis ( ra ) , or who be undergo immunosuppressive chemotherapy .
onset be often in a single joint  there may be little or no pain , ache pain that may be mild , gradual swelling , mild warmth , and minimal or no redness of the joint area .
diagnosis of infectious arthritis require the aspiration of a small quantity of synovial fluid from the afflict joint .
direct microscopic evaluation , culture , antimicrobial susceptibility testing , and polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) analyse of the synovial fluid be use to identify the potential pathogen .
typical treatment include administration of appropriate antimicrobial drug base on antimicrobial susceptibility testing .
for nondrug - resistant bacterial strain , β - lactam such as oxacillin and cefazolin be often prescribe for staphylococcal infection .
third - generation cephalosporin ( e . g . , ceftriaxone ) be use for increasingly prevalent β - lactam - resistant neisseria infection .
infection by mycobacterium spp .
or fungi be treat with appropriate long - term antimicrobial therapy .
even with treatment , the prognosis be often poor for those infect .
about four  zero % of patient with nongonnococcal infectious arthritis will suffer permanent joint damage and mortality rate range from five % to two  zero % . [ seven ] mortality rate be high among the elderly . [ eight ]
osteomyelitis osteomyelitis be an inflammation of bone tissue most commonly cause by infection .
these infection can either be acute or chronic and can involve a variety of different bacteria .
the most common causative agent of osteomyelitis be s . aureus .
however , m . tuberculosis , pseudomonas aeruginosa , streptococcus pyogene , s . agalactiae , specie in the enterobacteriaceae , and other microorganism can also cause osteomyelitis , depend on which bone be involve .
in adult , bacteria usually gain direct access to the bone tissue through trauma or a surgical procedure involve prosthetic joint .
in child , the bacteria be often introduce from the bloodstream , possibly spread from focal infection .
the long bone , such as the femur , be more commonly affect in child because of the more extensive vascularization of bone in the young . [ nine ]
the sign and symptom of osteomyelitis include fever , localize pain , swell due to edema , and ulcer in soft seven .
m . e . shirtliff , mader jt .
“
acute septic arthritis .
"
clinical microbiology reviews one  five
no .
four ( two  zero  zero  two  )  five  two  seven – five  four  four .
eight .
j . r .
maneiro et al .
“
predictors of treatment failure and mortality in native septic arthritis .
"
clinical rheumatology three  four , no .
one  one
( two  zero  one  five  )  one  nine  six  one – one  nine  six  seven .
nine .
m . vazquez .
“
osteomyelitis in children .
"
current opinion in pediatrics one  four , no .
one ( two  zero  zero  two  )  one  one  two – one  one  five . one  one  two  zero
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five tissue near the site of infection .
the result inflammation can lead to tissue damage and bone loss .
in addition , the infection may spread to joint , result in infectious arthritis , or disseminate into the blood , result in sepsis and thrombosis ( formation of blood clot ) .
like septic arthritis , osteomyelitis be usually diagnose use a combination of radiography , imaging , and identification of bacteria from blood culture , or from bone culture if blood culture be negative .
parenteral antibiotic therapy be typically use to treat osteomyelitis .
because of the number of different possible etiologic agent , however , a variety of drug may be use .
broad - spectrum antibacterial drug such as nafcillin , oxacillin , or cephalosporin be typically prescribe for acute osteomyelitis , and ampicillin and piperacillin / tazobactam for chronic osteomyelitis .
in case of antibiotic resistance , vancomycin treatment be sometimes require to control the infection .
in serious case , surgery to remove the site of infection may be require .
other form of treatment include hyperbaric oxygen therapy ( see use physical methods to control microorganisms ) and implantation of antibiotic bead or pump .

what bacterium the most common cause of both septic arthritis and osteomyelitis ?
rheumatic fever infections with s . pyogene have a variety of manifestation and complication generally call sequelae .
as mention , the bacterium can cause suppurative infection like puerperal fever .
however , this microbe can also cause nonsuppurative sequelae in the form of acute rheumatic fever ( arf ) , which can lead to rheumatic heart disease , thus impact the circulatory system .
rheumatic fever occur primarily in child a minimum of two – three week after an episode of untreated or inadequately treat pharyngitis ( see bacterial infections of the respiratory tract ) .
at one time , rheumatic fever be a major killer of child in the us  today , however , - pron - be rare in the us because of early diagnosis and treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis with antibiotic .
in part of the world where diagnosis and treatment be not readily available , acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease be still major cause of mortality in children . [ one  zero ] rheumatic fever be characterize by a variety of diagnostic sign and symptom cause by nonsuppurative , immunemediated damage result from a cross - reaction between patient antibody to bacterial surface protein and similar protein find on cardiac , neuronal , and synovial tissue .
damage to the nervous tissue or joint , which lead to joint pain and swelling , be reversible .
however , damage to heart valve can be irreversible and be worsen by repeat episode of acute rheumatic fever , particularly during the first three – five year after the first rheumatic fever attack .
the inflammation of the heart valve cause by cross - reacting antibody lead to scarring and stiffness of the valve leaflet .
this , in turn , produce a characteristic heart murmur .
patient who have previously develop rheumatic fever and who subsequently develop recurrent pharyngitis due to s . pyogene be at high risk for a recurrent attack of rheumatic fever .
the american heart association recommends[ one  one ] a treatment regiman consist of benzathine benzylpenicillin every three or four week , depend on the patient 's risk for reinfection .
additional prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be recommend depend on the age of the patient and risk for reinfection .
one  zero .
a . beaudoin et al .
“
acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
among children - american samoa , two  zero  one  one – two  zero  one  two .
"
morbidity and mortality weekly report six  four
no .
two  zero
( two  zero  one  five  )  five  five  five – five  five  eight .
one  one .
m . a . gerber et al .
“
prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis 
a scientific statement from the american heart association rheumatic fever , endocarditis , and kawasaki disease committee of the council on cardiovascular disease in the young , the interdisciplinary council on functional genomics and translational biology , and the interdisciplinary council on quality of care and outcomes
research  endorse by the american academy of pediatrics .
"
circulation one  one  nine , no .
one  one
( two  zero  zero  nine  )  one  five  four  one – one  five  five  one .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  two  one bacterial endocarditis and pericarditis
the endocardium be a tissue layer that line the muscle and valve of the heart .
this tissue can become infect by a variety of bacteria , include gram - positive cocci such as staphylococcus aureus , viridan streptococci , and enterococcus faecalis , and the gram - negative so - call hacek bacilli 
haemophilus spp .
, actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitan , cardiobacterium homini , eikenella corroden , and kingella kingae .
the result inflammation be call endocarditis , which can be describe as either acute or subacute .
causative agent typically enter the bloodstream during accidental or intentional breach in the normal barrier defense ( e . g . , dental procedure , body piercing , catheterization , wound ) .
individual with preexist heart damage , prosthetic valve and other cardiac device , and those with a history of rheumatic fever have a high risk for endocarditis .
this disease can rapidly destroy the heart valve and , if untreated , lead to death in just a few day .
in subacute bacterial endocarditis , heart valve damage occur slowly over a period of month .
during this time , blood clot form in the heart , and these protect the bacteria from phagocyte .
these patch of tissue - associate bacteria be call vegetation .
the result damage to the heart , in part result from the immune response cause fibrosis of heart valve , can necessitate heart valve replacement ( figure two  five  .  six ) .
outward sign of subacute endocarditis may include a fever .
diagnosis of infective endocarditis be determine use the combination of blood culture , echocardiogram , and clinical symptom .
in both acute and subacute endocarditis , treatment typically involve relatively high dos of intravenous antibiotic as determine by antimicrobial susceptibility testing .
acute endocarditis be often treat with a combination of ampicillin , nafcillin , and gentamicin for synergistic coverage of staphylococcus spp .
and streptococcus spp .
prosthetic - valve endocarditis be often treat with a combination of vancomycin , rifampin , and gentamicin .
rifampin be necessary to treat individual with infection of prosthetic valve or other foreign body because rifampin can penetrate the biofilm of most of the pathogen that infect these device .
staphylcoccus spp .
and streptococcus spp .
can also infect and cause inflammation in the tissue surround the heart , a condition call acute pericarditis .
pericarditis be mark by chest pain , difficulty breathing , and a dry cough .
in most case , pericarditis be self - limit and clinical intervention be not necessary .
diagnosis be make with the aid of a chest radiograph , electrocardiogram , echocardiogram , aspirate of pericardial fluid , or biopsy of pericardium .
antibacterial medication may be prescribe for infection associate with pericarditis  however , pericarditis can also be cause other pathogen , include virus ( e . g . , echovirus , influenza virus ) , fungi ( e . g . , histoplasma spp .
, coccidioides spp . ) , and eukaryotic parasite ( e . g . , toxoplasma spp . ) .
figure two  five  .  six
the heart of an individual who have subacute bacterial endocarditis of the mitral valve .
bacterial vegetation be visible on the valve tissue .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) one  one  two  two
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at
http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
compare acute and subacute bacterial endocarditis .
gas gangrene
traumatic injury or certain medical condition , such as diabetes , can cause damage to blood vessel that interrupt blood flow to a region of the body .
when blood flow be interrupt , tissue begin to die , create an anaerobic environment in which anaerobic bacteria can thrive .
this condition be call ischemia .
endospore of the anaerobic bacterium clostridium perfringen ( along with a number of other clostridium spp .
from the gut ) can readily germinate in ischemic tissue and colonize the anaerobic tissue .
the result infection , call gas gangrene , be characterize by rapidly spread myonecrosis ( death of muscle tissue ) .
the patient experience a sudden onset of excruciate pain at the infection site and the rapid development of a foul - smell wound contain gas bubble and a thin , yellowish discharge tinge with a small amount of blood .
as the infection progress , edema and cutaneous blister contain bluish - purple fluid form .
the infected tissue become liquefy and begin slough off .
the margin between necrotic and healthy tissue often advance several inch per hour even with antibiotic therapy .
septic shock and organ failure frequently accompany gas gangrene  when patient develop sepsis , the mortality rate be great than five  zero % .
α - toxin and theta ( θ ) toxin be the major virulence factor of c . perfringen implicate in gas gangrene .
α
- toxin be a lipase responsible for break down cell membrane  - pron - also cause the formation of thrombi ( blood clot ) in blood vessel , contribute to the spread of ischemia .
θ
- toxin form pore in the patient 's cell membrane , cause cell lysis .
the gas associate with gas gangrene be produce by clostridium 's fermentation of butyric acid , which produce hydrogen and carbon dioxide that be release as the bacteria multiply , form pocket of gas in tissue ( figure two  five  .  seven ) .
gas gangrene be initially diagnose base on the presence of the clinical sign and symptom describe earlier in this section .
diagnosis can be confirm through gram stain and anaerobic cultivation of wound exudate ( drainage ) and tissue sample on blood agar .
treatment typically involve surgical debridement of any necrotic tissue  advanced case may require amputation .
surgeon may also use vacuum - assist closure ( vac ) , a surgical technique in which vacuum - assist drainage be use to remove blood or serous fluid from a wound or surgical site to speed recovery .
the most common antibiotic treatment include penicillin g and clindamycin .
some case be also treat with hyperbaric oxygen therapy because clostridium spp .
be incapable of survive in oxygen - rich environment .
figure two  five  .  seven ( a )
in this image of a patient with gas gangrene , note the bluish - purple discoloration around the bicep and the irregular margin of the discolored tissue indicate the spread of infection .
( b )
a radiograph of the arm show a darkening in the tissue , which indicate the presence of gas .
( credit a , b  modification of work by aggelidakis j , lasithiotakis k , topalidou a , koutroumpas j , kouvidis g , and katonis p ) chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic
system infections one  one  two  three tularemia infection with the gram - negative bacterium francisella tularensis cause tularemia ( or rabbit fever ) , a zoonotic infection in human .
f . tularensis be a facultative intracellular parasite that primarily cause illness in rabbit , although a wide variety of domesticate animal be also susceptible to infection .
human can be infect through ingestion of contaminate meat or , more typically , handling of infect animal tissue ( e . g . , skin an infect rabbit ) .
tularemia can also be transmit by the bite of infect arthropod , include the dog tick ( dermacentor variabilis ) , the lone star tick ( amblyomma americanum ) , the wood tick ( dermacentor andersoni ) , and deer fly ( chrysops spp . ) .
although the disease be not directly communicable between human , exposure to aerosol of f . tularensis can result in life - threaten infection .
f . tularensis be highly contagious , with an infectious dose of as few as one  zero bacterial cell .
in addition , pulmonary infection have a three  zero %– six  zero % fatality rate if untreated . [ one  two ]
for these reason , f . tularensis be currently classify and must be handle as a biosafety level -  three ( bsl -  three ) organism and as a potential biological warfare agent .
follow introduction through a break in the skin , the bacteria initially move to the lymph node , where - pron - be ingest by phagocyte .
after escape from the phagosome , the bacteria grow and multiply intracellularly in the cytoplasm of phagocyte .
- pron - can later become disseminate through the blood to other organ such as the liver , lung , and spleen , where - pron - produce mass of tissue call granuloma ( figure two  five  .  eight ) .
after an incubation period of about three day , skin lesion develop at the site of infection .
other sign and symptom include fever , chill , headache , and swollen and painful lymph node .
figure two  five  .  eight ( a )
a skin lesion appear at the site of infection on the hand of an individual infect with francisella tularensis .
( b )
a scan electron micrograph show the coccobacilli cell ( blue ) of f . tularensis .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by niaid )
a direct diagnosis of tularemia be challenging because - pron - be so contagious .
once a presumptive diagnosis of tularemia be make , special handling be require to collect and process patient ' specimen to prevent the infection of healthcare worker .
specimen suspect of contain f . tularensis can only be handle by bsl -  two or bsl -  three laboratory register with the federal select agent program , and individual handle the speciman must wear protective equipment and use a class ii biological safety cabinet .
tularemia be relatively rare in the us , and - pron - sign and symptom be similar to a variety of other infection that may need to be rule out before a diagnosis can be make .
direct fluorescent - antibody ( dfa ) microscopic examination use antibody specific for f . tularensis can rapidly confirm the presence of this pathogen .
culture this microbe be difficult because of - pron - requirement for the amino acid cysteine , which must be supply as an extra nutrient in culture medium .
serological test be available to detect an immune response against the bacterial pathogen .
in patient with suspect infection , acute - and convalescent - phase serum sample be require to confirm an active one  two .
world health organization .
“
who guideline on tularaemia .
" two  zero  zero  seven .
http / / www . cdc . gov / tularemia / resources / whotularemiamanual . pdf .
accessed july two  six , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  two  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five infection .
pcr - base test can also be use for clinical identification of direct specimen from body fluid or tissue as well as culture specimen .
in most case , diagnosis be base on clinical finding and likely incident of exposure to the bacterium .
the antibiotic streptomycin , gentamycin , doxycycline , and ciprofloxacin be effective in treat tularemia .
brucellosis species in the genus
brucella be gram - negative facultative intracellular pathogen that appear as coccobacilli .
several specie cause zoonotic infection in animal and human , four of which have significant human pathogenicity  b . abortus from cattle and buffalo , b . cani from dog , b . suis from swine , and b . melitensis from goat , sheep , and camel .
infection by these pathogen be call brucellosis , also know as undulant fever ,
“ mediterranean fever , " or “ malta fever .
”
vaccination of animal have make brucellosis a rare disease in the us , but - pron - be still common in the mediterranean , south and central asia , central and south america , and the caribbean .
human infection be primarily associate with the ingestion of meat or unpasteurized dairy product from infected animal .
infection can also occur through inhalation of bacteria in aerosol when handle animal product , or through direct contact with skin wound .
in the us , most case of brucellosis be find in individual with extensive exposure to potentially infect animal ( e . g . , slaughterhouse worker , veterinarian ) .
two important virulence factor produce by brucella spp . be urease , which allow ingested bacteria to avoid destruction by stomach acid , and lipopolysaccharide ( lps ) , which allow the bacteria to survive within phagocyte .
after gain entry to tissue , the bacteria be phagocytize by host neutrophil and macrophage .
the bacteria then escape from the phagosome and grow within the cytoplasm of the cell .
bacteria phagocytize by macrophage be disseminate throughout the body .
this result in the formation of granuloma within many body site , include bone , liver , spleen , lung , genitourinary tract , brain , heart , eye , and skin .
acute infection can result in undulant ( relapse ) fever , but untreated infection develop into chronic disease that usually manifest as acute febrile illness ( fever of four  zero – four  one ° c [ one  zero  four – one  zero  five  .  eight ° f ] ) with recur flu - like sign and symptom .
brucella be only reliably find in the blood during the acute fever stage  - pron - be difficult to diagnose by cultivation .
in addition , brucella be consider a bsl -  three pathogen and be hazardous to handle in the clinical laboratory without protective clothing and at least a class ii biological safety cabinet .
agglutination test be most often use for serodiagnosis .
in addition , enzyme - link immunosorbent assay ( elisas ) be available to determine exposure to the organism .
the antibiotic doxycycline or ciprofloxacin be typically prescribe in combination with rifampin  gentamicin , streptomycin , and trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole ( tmp - smz ) be also effective against brucella infection and can be use if need .

compare the pathogenesis of tularemia and brucellosis .
cat - scratch disease
the zoonosis cat - scratch disease ( csd ) ( or cat - scratch fever ) be a bacterial infection that can be introduce to the lymph node when a human be bite or scratch by a cat .
- pron - be cause by the facultative intracellular gram - negative bacterium bartonella henselae .
cat can become infected from flea fece contain b . henselae that - pron - ingest while grooming .
human become infected when flea fece or cat saliva ( from claws or licking ) contain b . henselae be introduce at the site of a bite or scratch .
once introduce into a wound , b . henselae infect red blood cell .
b . henselae invasion of red blood cell be facilitate by adhesin associate with outer membrane protein and a secretion system that mediate transport of virulence factor into the host cell .
evidence of infection be indicate if a small nodule with pus form in the location of the scratch one to three week after the initial injury .
the bacteria then migrate to the near lymph node , where - pron - cause swell and pain .
sign and symptom may also include fever , chill , and fatigue .
most infection be mild and tend to be self - limit .
however , immunocompromised patient may chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic
system infections one  one  two  five develop bacillary angiomatosis ( ba ) , characterize by the proliferation of blood vessel , result in the formation of tumor - like mass in the skin and internal organ  or bacillary peliosis ( bp ) , characterize by multiple cyst - like , blood - fill cavity in the liver and spleen .
most case of csd can be prevent by keep cat free of flea and promptly clean a cat scratch with soap and warm water .
the diagnosis of csd be difficult because the bacterium do not grow readily in the laboratory .
when necessary , immunofluorescence , serological test , pcr , and gene sequencing can be perform to identify the bacterial specie .
give the limited nature of these infection , antibiotic be not normally prescribe .
for immunocompromised patient , rifampin , azithromycin , ciprofloxacin , gentamicin ( intramuscularly ) , or tmp - smz be generally the most effective option .
rat - bite fever
the zoonotic infection rat - bite fever can be cause by two different gram - negative bacteria  streptobacillus moniliformi , which be more common in north america , and spirillum minor , which be more common in asia .
because of modern sanitation effort , rat bite be rare in the us .
however , contact with fomite , food , or water contaminate by rat fece or body fluid can also cause infection .
sign and symptom of rat - bite fever include fever , vomiting , myalgia ( muscle pain ) , arthralgia ( joint pain ) , and a maculopapular rash on the hand and foot .
an ulcer may also form at the site of a bite , along with some swelling of nearby lymph node .
in most case , the infection be self - limit .
little be know about the virulence factor that contribute to these sign and symptom of disease .
cell culture , maldi - tof mass spectrometry , pcr , or elisa can be use in the identification of streptobacillus moniliformi .
the diagnosis spirillum minor may be confirm by direct microscopic observation of the pathogen in blood use giemsa or wright stain , or darkfield microscopy .
serological test can be use to detect a host immune response to the pathogen after about one  zero day .
the most commonly use antibiotic to treat these infection be penicillin or doxycycline .
plague the gram - negative bacillus yersinia pestis cause the zoonotic infection plague .
this bacterium cause acute febrile disease in animal , usually rodent or other small mammal , and human .
the disease be associate with a high mortality rate if leave untreated .
historically , y . pestis have be responsible for several devastating pandemic , result in million of death ( see micro connections  the history of the plague ) .
there be three form of plague  bubonic plague ( the most common form , account for about eight  zero % of case ) , pneumonic plague , and septicemic plague .
these form be differentiate by the mode of transmission and the initial site of infection .
figure two  five  .  nine illustrate these various mode of transmission and infection between animal and human .
in bubonic plague , y . pestis be transfer by the bite of infect flea .
since most flea bite occur on the leg and ankle , y . pestis be often introduce into the tissue and blood circulation in the low extremity .
after a two  - to six  - day incubation period , patient experience an abrupt onset fever ( three  nine  .  five – four  one ° c [ one  zero  three  .  one – one  zero  five  .  eight ° f ] ) , headache , hypotension , and chill .
the pathogen localize in lymph node , where - pron - cause inflammation , swelling , and hemorrhage that result in purple bubo ( figure two  five  .  one  zero ) .
bubo often form in lymph node of the groin first because these be the node associate with the low limb  eventually , through circulation in the blood and lymph , lymph node throughout the body become infected and form bubo .
the average mortality rate for bubonic plague be about five  five % if untreated and about one  zero % with antibiotic treatment .
septicemic plague occur when y . pestis be directly introduce into the bloodstream through a cut or wound and circulate through the body .
the incubation period for septicemic plague be one to three day , after which patient develop fever , chill , extreme weakness , abdominal pain , and shock .
disseminate intravascular coagulation ( dic ) can also occur , result in the formation of thrombi that obstruct blood vessel and promote ischemia and necrosis in surround tissue ( figure two  five  .  one  zero ) .
necrosis occur most commonly in extremity such as finger and toe , which become blacken .
septicemic plague can quickly lead to death , with a mortality rate near one  zero  zero % when - pron - be untreated .
even with antibiotic treatment , the mortality rate be about five  zero % .
pneumonic plague occur when y . pestis cause an infection of the lung .
this can occur through inhalation of one  one  two  six chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five aerosolized droplet from an infected individual or when the infection spread to the lung from elsewhere in the body in patient with bubonic or septicemic plague .
after an incubation period of one to three day , sign and symptom include fever , headache , weakness , and a rapidly develop pneumonia with shortness of breath , chest pain , and cough produce bloody or watery mucus .
the pneumonia may result in rapid respiratory failure and shock .
pneumonic plague be the only form of plague that can be spread from person to person by infectious aerosol droplet .
if untreated , the mortality rate be near one  zero  zero %  with antibiotic treatment , the mortality rate be about five  zero % .
figure two  five  .  nine yersinia pestis , the causative agent of plague , have numerous mode of transmission .
the mode be divide into two ecological class  urban and sylvatic ( i . e . , forest or rural ) .
the urban cycle primarily involve transmission from infected urban mammal ( rat ) to human by flea vector ( brown arrow ) .
the disease may travel between urban center ( purple arrow ) if infect rat find - pron - way onto ship or train .
the sylvatic cycle involve mammal more common in nonurban environment .
sylvatic bird and mammal ( include human ) may become infected after eat infect mammal ( pink arrow ) or by flea vector .
pneumonic transmission occur between human or between human and infected animal through the inhalation of y . pestis in aerosol .
( credit “ diagram
" 
modification of work by stenseth nc , atshabar bb , begon m , belmain sr , bertherat e , carniel e , gage kl , leirs h , and rahalison l
 credit “ cat " 
modification of work by “ kacey nine  seven  zero  seven  eight ” / flickr )
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic
system infections one  one  two  seven figure two  five  .  one  zero ( a ) yersinia pestis infection can cause inflamed and swollen lymph node ( bubo ) , like these in the groin of an infected patient .
( b ) septicemic plague cause necrotic toe in this patient .
vascular damage at the extremity cause ischemia and tissue death .
( credit a  modification of work by american society for microbiology  credit b  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
the high mortality rate for the plague be , in part , a consequence of - pron - be unusually well equip with virulence factor .
to date , there be at least one  five different major virulence factor that have be identify from y . pestis and , of these , eight be involve with adherence to host cell .
in addition , the f one component of the y . pestis capsule be a virulence factor that allow the bacterium to avoid phagocytosis .
f one be produce in large quantity during mammalian infection and be the most immunogenic component . [ one  three ] successful use of virulence factor allow the bacilli to disseminate from the area of the bite to regional lymph node and eventually the entire blood and lymphatic system .
culturing and direct microscopic examination of a sample of fluid from a bubo , blood , or sputum be the good way to identify y . pestis and confirm a presumptive diagnosis of plague .
specimen may be stain use either a gram , giemsa , wright , or wayson ' s staining technique ( figure two  five  .  one  one ) .
the bacteria show a characteristic bipolar staining pattern , resemble safety pin , that facilitate presumptive identification .
direct fluorescent antibody test ( rapid test of outer - membrane antigen ) and serological test like elisa can be use to confirm the diagnosis .
the confirmatory method for identify y . pestis isolate in the us be bacteriophage lysis .
prompt antibiotic therapy can resolve most case of bubonic plague , but septicemic and pneumonic plague be more difficult to treat because of - pron - short incubation stage .
survival often depend on an early and accurate diagnosis and an appropriate choice of antibiotic therapy .
in the us , the most common antibiotic use to treat patient with plague be gentamicin , fluoroquinolone , streptomycin , levofloxacin , ciprofloxacin , and doxycycline .
one  three .
moh key laboratory of systems biology of pathogens .
“
virulence factors of pathogenic bacteria , yersinia .
"
http / / www . mgc . ac . cn / cgi - bin / vf / genus . cgi ? genus = yersinia .
accessed september nine , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  two  eight
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  five  .  one  one
this wright 's stain of a blood sample from a patient with plague show the characteristic " safety pin " appearance of yersinia pestis .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

compare bubonic plague , septicemic plague , and pneumonic plague .
the history of the plague
the first record pandemic of plague , the justinian plague , occur in the sixth century ce .
- pron - be think to have originate in central africa and spread to the mediterranean through trade route .
at - pron - peak , more than five  ,  zero  zero  zero people die per day in constantinople alone .
ultimately , one - third of that city 's population succumb to plague . [ one  four ]
the impact of this outbreak probably contribute to the later fall of emperor justinian .
the second major pandemic , dub the black death , occur during the one  four th century .
this time , the infection be think to have originate somewhere in asia before be transport to europe by trade , soldier , and war refugee .
this outbreak kill an estimate one - quarter of the population of europe ( two  five million , primarily in major city ) .
in addition , at least another two  five million be think to have be kill in asia and africa . [ one  five ]
this second pandemic , associate with strain yersinia pestis biovar medievalis , cycle for another three  zero  zero year in europe and great britain , and be call the great plague in the one  six  six  zero .
the most recent pandemic occur in the one  eight  nine  zero s with yersinia pestis biovar orientalis .
this outbreak originate in the yunnan province of china and spread worldwide through trade .
- pron - be at this time that plague make - pron - way to the us .
the etiologic agent of plague be discover by alexandre yersin ( one  eight  six  three – one  nine  four  three ) during this outbreak as well .
the overall number of death be low than in prior outbreak , perhaps because of improve sanitation and medical support . [ one  six ] most of the death attribute to this final pandemic occur in india .
micro connections one  four .
rosen , william .
justinian 's flea 
plague , empire , and the birth of europe .
viking adult  pg three  isbn nine  seven  eight - zero - six  seven  zero - zero  three  eight  five  five - eight . one  five .
benedictow , ole j . two  zero  zero  four .
the black death one  three  four  six - one  three  five  three  the complete history .
woodbridge 
boydell press .
one  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
plague  history .
" http / / www . cdc . gov / plague / history / . accessed september one  five , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  two  nine visit this link ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two blackdeath ) to see a video describe how similar the genome of the black death bacterium be to today 's strain of bubonic plague .
zoonotic febrile diseases
a wide variety of zoonotic febrile disease ( disease that cause fever ) be cause by pathogenic bacteria that require arthropod vector .
these pathogen be either obligate intracellular specie of anaplasma , bartonella , ehrlichia , orientia , and rickettsia , or spirochete in the genus borrelia .
isolation and identification of pathogen in this group be best perform in bsl -  three laboratory because of the low infective dose associate with the disease .
anaplasmosis
the zoonotic tickborne disease human granulocytic anaplasmosis ( hga ) be cause by the obligate intracellular pathogen anaplasma phagocytophilum .
hga be endemic primarily in the central and northeastern us and in country in europe and asia .
hga be usually a mild febrile disease that cause flu - like symptom in immunocompetent patient  however , symptom be severe enough to require hospitalization in at least five  zero % of infection and , of those patient , less than one % will die of hga . [ one  seven ]
small mammal such as white - footed mouse , chipmunk , and vole have be identify as reservoir of a . phagocytophilum , which be transmit by the bite of an ixodes tick .
five major virulence factors[ one  eight ] have be report in anaplasma  three be adherence factor and two be factor that allow the pathogen to avoid the human immune response .
diagnostic approach include locate intracellular microcolonie of anaplasma through microscopic examination of neutrophil or eosinophil stain with giemsa or wright stain , pcr for detection of a . phagocytophilum , and serological test to detect antibody titer against the pathogen .
the primary antibiotic use for treatment be doxycycline .
ehrlichiosis human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis ( hme ) be a zoonotic tickborne disease cause by the bsl -  two , obligate intracellular pathogen ehrlichia chaffeensis .
currently , the geographic distribution of hme be primarily the eastern half of the us , with a few case report in the west , which correspond with the known geographic distribution of the primary vector , the lone star tick ( amblyomma americanum ) .
symptom of hme be similar to the flu - like symptom observe in anaplasmosis , but a rash be more common , with six  zero % of child and less than three  zero % of adult develop petechial , macula , and maculopapular
rashes . [ one  nine ]
virulence factor allow e . chaffeensis to adhere to and infect monocyte , form intracellular microcolonie in monocyte that be diagnostic for the hme .
diagnosis of hme can be confirm with pcr and serologic test .
the first - line treatment for adult and child of all age with hme be doxycycline .
link to learning one  seven .
j . s . bakken et al .
“
diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial diseases 
rocky mountain spotted fever , ehrlichioses , and anaplasmosis – united states .
a practical guide for physicians and other health care and public health professionals .
”
mmwr recommendations and report
five  five
no .
rr zero  four
( two  zero  zero  six  )  one – two  seven . one  eight .
moh key laboratory of systems biology of pathogens , “ virulence factors of pathogenic bacteria , anaplasma ” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . mgc . ac . cn / cgi - bin / vfs / jsif / main . cgi .
accessed july , two  six , two  zero  one  six .
one  nine .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
ehrlichiosis , symptoms , diagnosis , and treatment .
" two  zero  one  six .
https / / www . cdc . gov / ehrlichiosis / symptom / index . html .
accessed july two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  three  zero chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five epidemic typhus
the disease epidemic typhus be cause by rickettsia prowazekii and be transmit by body lice , pediculus humanu .
fly squirrel be animal reservoir of r . prowazekii in north america and can also be source of lice capable of transmit the pathogen .
epidemic typhus be characterize by a high fever and body ache that last for about two week .
a rash develop on the abdomen and chest and radiate to the extremity .
severe case can result in death from shock or damage to heart and brain tissue .
infect human be an important reservoir for this bacterium because r . prowazekii be the only rickettsia that can establish a chronic carrier state in human .
epidemic typhus have play an important role in human history , cause large outbreak with high mortality rate during time of war or adversity .
during world war i , epidemic typhus kill more than three million people on the eastern front . [ two  zero ] with the advent of effective insecticide and improve personal hygiene , epidemic typhus be now quite rare in the us .
in the develop world , however , epidemic can lead to mortality rate of up to four  zero % in the absence of treatment . [ two  one ]
in recent year , most outbreak have take place in burundi , ethiopia , and rwanda .
for example , an outbreak in burundi refugee camp in one  nine  nine  seven result in four  five  ,  zero  zero  zero illness in a population of about seven  six  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero people . [ two  two ]
a rapid diagnosis be difficult because of the similarity of the primary symptom with those of many other disease .
molecular and immunohistochemical diagnostic test be the most useful method for establish a diagnosis during the acute stage of illness when therapeutic decision be critical .
pcr to detect distinctive gene from r . prowazekii can be use to confirm the diagnosis of epidemic typhus , along with immunofluorescent staining of tissue biopsy specimen .
serology be usually use to identify rickettsial infection .
however , adequate antibody titer take up to one  zero day to develop .
antibiotic therapy be typically begin before the diagnosis be complete .
the most common drug use to treat patient with epidemic typhus be doxycycline or chloramphenicol .
murine ( endemic )
typhus murine typhus ( also know as endemic typhus ) be cause by rickettsia typhi and be transmit by the bite of the rat flea , xenopsylla cheopi , with infected rat as the main reservoir .
clinical sign and symptom of murine typhus include a rash and chill accompany by headache and fever that last about one  two day .
some patient also exhibit a cough and pneumonia - like symptom .
severe illness can develop in immunocompromised patient , with seizure , coma , and renal and respiratory failure .
clinical diagnosis of murine typhus can be confirm from a biopsy specimen from the rash .
diagnostic test include indirect immunofluorescent antibody ( ifa ) staining , pcr for r . typhi , and acute and convalescent serologic testing .
primary treatment be doxycycline , with chloramphenicol as the second choice .
rocky mountain spot fever
the disease rocky mountain spot fever ( rmsf ) be cause by rickettsia rickettsii and be transmit by the bite of a hard - bodied tick such as the american dog tick ( dermacentor variabilis ) , rocky mountain wood tick ( d . andersoni ) , or brown dog tick ( rhipicephalus sanguineus ) .
this disease be endemic in north and south america and - pron - incidence be coincident with the arthropod vector range .
despite - pron - name , most case in the us do not occur in the rocky mountain region but in the southeast  north carolina , oklahoma , arkansas , tennessee , and missouri account for great than six  zero % of all cases . [ two  three ]
the map in figure two  five  .  one  two show the distribution of prevalence in the us in two  zero  one  zero .
two  zero .
drali , r . , brouqui , p . and raoult , d . “ typhus in world war i . " microbiology today four  one ( two  zero  one  four )
two   five  eight – six  one .
two  one .
center for disease control and prevention .
cdc health information for international travel two  zero  one  four  the yellow book .
oxford university press , two  zero  one  three .
http / / wwwnc . cdc . gov / travel / yellowbook /  two  zero  one  six  / infectious - disease - relate - to - travel / rickettsial - spot - typhus - feversrelated - infection - anaplasmosis - ehrlichiosis .
access july two  six , two  zero  one  six .
two  two .
world health organization .
“
typhus .
" one  nine  nine  seven .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs one  six  two  / en / . accessed july two  six , two  zero  one  six .
two  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
rocky mountain spot fever ( rmsf )  statistics and epidemiology .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / rmsf / stats / index . html .
accessed sept one  six , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  three  one figure two  five  .  one  two
in the us , rocky mountain spot fever be most prevalent in the southeastern state .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) sign and symptom of rmsf include a high fever , headache , body ache , nausea , and vomiting .
a petechial rash ( similar in appearance to measle ) begin on the hand and wrist , and spread to the trunk , face , and extremity ( figure two  five  .  one  three ) .
if untreated , rmsf be a serious illness that can be fatal in the first eight day even in otherwise healthy patient .
ideally , treatment should begin before petechiae develop , because this be a sign of progression to severe disease  however , the rash usually do not appear until day six or later after onset of symptom and only occur in three  five %– six  zero % of patient with the infection .
increase vascular permeability associate with petechiae formation can result in fatality rate of three % or great , even in the presence of clinical support .
most death be due to hypotension and cardiac arrest or from ischemia follow blood coagulation .
diagnosis can be challenge because the disease mimics several other disease that be more prevalent .
the diagnosis of rmsf be make base on symptom , fluorescent antibody stain of a biopsy specimen from the rash , pcr for rickettsia rickettsii , and acute and convalescent serologic testing .
primary treatment be doxycycline , with chloramphenicol as the second choice .
figure two  five  .  one  three rocky mountain spot fever cause a petechial rash .
unlike epidemic or murine typhus , the rash begin at the hand and wrist and then spread to the trunk .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
one  one  three  two
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five lyme disease lyme disease be cause by the spirochete borrelia burgdorferi that be transmit by the bite of a hard - bodied , blackleg ixodes tick .
i . scapularis be the biological vector transmit b . burgdorferi in the eastern and north - central us and i . pacificus transmit b . burgdorferi in the western us
( figure two  five  .  one  five ) .
different specie of ixode tick be responsible for b . burgdorferi transmission in asia and europe .
in the us , lyme disease be the most commonly report vectorborne illness .
in two  zero  one  four , - pron - be the fifth most common nationally notifiable disease . [ two  four ]
ixodes tick have complex life cycle and deer , mouse , and even bird can act as reservoir .
over two year , the tick pass through four developmental stage and require a blood meal from a host at each stage .
in the spring , tick egg hatch into six - legged larvae .
these larvae do not carry b . burgdorferi initially .
- pron - may acquire the spirochete when - pron - take - pron - first blood meal ( typically from a mouse ) .
the larvae then overwinter and molt into eight - legged nymph in the follow spring .
nymph take blood meal primarily from small rodent , but may also feed on human , burrow into the skin .
the feeding period can last several day to a week , and - pron - typically take two  four hour for an infected nymph to transmit enough b . burgdorferi to cause infection in a human host .
nymph ultimately mature into male and female adult tick , which tend to feed on large animal like deer or , occasionally , human .
the adult then mate and produce egg to continue the cycle ( figure two  five  .  one  four ) .
two  four .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
lyme disease .
data and statistics .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / lyme / stats / index . html .
accessed july two  six , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  three  three figure two  five  .  one  four
this image show the two  - year life cycle of the black - legged tick , the biological vector of lyme disease .
( credit “ mouse
" 
modification of work by george shuklin )
the symptom of lyme disease follow three stage  early localize , early disseminate , and late stage .
during the early - localize stage , approximately seven  zero %– eight  zero %[ two  five ] of case may be characterize by a bull ' s - eye rash , call erythema migran , at the site of the initial tick bite .
the rash form three to three  zero day after the tick bite ( seven day be the average ) and may also be warm to the touch ( figure two  five  .  one  five  ) . [ two  six ]
this diagnostic sign be often overlook if the tick bite occur on the scalp or another less visible location .
other early symptom include flu - like symptom such as malaise , headache , fever , and muscle stiffness .
if the patient go untreated , the second early - disseminate stage of the disease occur day to week later .
the symptom at this stage may include severe headache , neck stiffness , facial paralysis , arthritis , and carditis .
the late - stage manifestation of the disease may occur year after exposure .
chronic inflammation cause damage that can eventually cause severe arthritis , meningitis , encephalitis , and alter mental state .
the disease may be fatal if untreated .
a presumptive diagnosis of lyme disease can be make base solely on the presence of a bull's - eye rash at the site of infection , if - pron - be present , in addition to other associate symptom ( figure two  five  .  one  five ) .
in addition , indirect two  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
signs and symptoms of untreated lyme disease .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / lyme / signs_symptom / index . html .
accessed july two  seven , two  zero  one  six .
two  six .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
ticks .
symptom of tickborne illness .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / ticks / symptoms . html .
accessed july two  seven , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  three  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five immunofluorescent antibody
( ifa ) labeling can be use to visualize bacteria from blood or skin biopsy specimen .
serological test like elisa can also be use to detect serum antibody produce in response to infection .
during the early stage of infection ( about three  zero day ) , antibacterial drug such as amoxicillin and doxycycline be effective .
in the later stage , penicillin g , chloramphenicol , or ceftriaxone can be give intravenously .
figure two  five  .  one  five ( a )
a characteristic bull 's eye rash of lyme disease form at the site of a tick bite .
( b )
a darkfield micrograph show borrelia burgdorferi , the causative agent of lyme disease .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by american society for microbiology )
relapsing fever borrelia spp .
also can cause relapse fever .
two of the most common specie be b . recurrentis , which cause epidemic of louseborne relapsing fever , and b . hermsii , which cause tickborne relapsing fever .
these borrelia specie be transmit by the body louse pediculus humanus and the soft - bodied tick ornithodoros hermsi , respectively .
lice acquire the spirochete from human reservoir , whereas tick acquire - pron - from rodent reservoir .
spirochete infect human when borrelia in the vector 's saliva or excreta enter the skin rapidly as the vector bite .
in both louse - and tickborne relapse fever , bacteremia usually occur after the initial exposure , lead to a sudden high fever ( three  nine – four  three ° c [ one  zero  two  .  two – one  zero  nine  .  four ° f ) typically accompany by headache and muscle ache .
after about three day , these symptom typically subside , only to return again after about a week .
after another three day , the symptom subside again but return a week later , and this cycle may repeat several time unless - pron - be disrupt by antibiotic treatment .
immune evasion through bacterial antigenic variation be responsible for the cyclical nature of the symptom in these disease .
the diagnosis of relapse fever can be make by observation of spirochete in blood , use darkfield microscopy ( figure two  five  .  one  six ) .
for louseborne relapsing fever , doxycycline or erythromycin be the first - line antibiotic .
for tickborne relapsing fever , tetracycline or erythromycin be the first - line antibiotic .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  three  five figure two  five  .  one  six
a peripheral blood smear from a patient with tickborne relapsing fever .
borrelia appear as thin spirochete among the large red blood cell .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
trench fever
the louseborne disease trench fever be first characterize as a specific disease during world war i , when approximately one million soldier be infect .
today , - pron - be primarily limit to area of the develop world where poor sanitation and hygiene lead to infestation of lice ( e . g . , overpopulate urban area and refugee camp ) .
trench fever be cause by the gram - negative bacterium bartonella quintana , which be transmit when fece from infected body lice , pediculus humanus var corporis , be rub into the louse bite , abraded skin , or the conjunctiva .
the symptom typically follow a five  - day course mark by a high fever , body ache , conjunctivitis , ocular pain , severe headache , and severe bone pain in the shin , neck , and back .
diagnosis can be make use blood culture  serological test like elisa can be use to detect antibody titer to the pathogen and pcr can also be use .
the first - line antibiotic be doxycycline , macrolide antibiotic , and ceftriaxone .

what be the vector associate with epidemic typhus ?

describe the life cycle of the deer tick and how - pron - spread lyme disease .
tick tips
many of the disease cover in this chapter involve arthropod vector .
of these , tick be probably the most commonly encounter in the us .
adult tick have eight leg and two body segment , the cephalothorax and the head ( figure two  five  .  one  seven ) .
- pron - typically range from two mm to four mm in length , and feed on the blood of the host by attach - pron - to the skin .
unattached tick should be remove and eliminate as soon as - pron - be discover .
when remove a tick that have already attach - pron - , keep the follow guideline in mind to reduce the chance of exposure to pathogen 
micro connections one  one  three  six chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five  use blunt tweezer to gently pull near the site of attachment until the tick release - pron - hold on the skin .

avoid crush the tick ' s body and do not handle the tick with bare finger .
this could release bacterial pathogen and actually increase - pron - exposure .
the tick can be kill by drown in water or alcohol , or freeze if - pron - may be need later for identification and analysis .

disinfect the area thoroughly by swab with an antiseptic such as isopropanol .

monitor the site of the bite for rash or other sign of infection .
many ill - advise home remedy for tick removal have become popular in recent year , propagate by social medium and pseudojournalism .
health professional should discourage patient from resort to any of the follow method , which be not recommend   use chemical ( e . g . , petroleum jelly or fingernail polish ) to dislodge an attach tick , because - pron - can cause the tick to release fluid , which can increase the chance of infection  use hot object ( match or cigarette butt ) to dislodge an attached tick  squeeze the tick ' s body with finger or tweezer figure two  five  .  one  seven ( a )
this black - legged tick , also know as the deer tick , have not yet attach to the skin .
( b )
a notched tick extractor can be use for removal .
( c ) to remove an attached tick with fine - tipped tweezer , pull gently on the mouth part until the tick release - pron - hold on the skin .
avoid squeeze the tick 's body , because this could release pathogen and thus increase the risk of contract lyme disease .
( credit a  modification of work by jerry kirkhart  credit c  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
bacterial infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
although the circulatory system be a closed system , bacteria can enter the bloodstream through several route .
wound , animal bite , or other break in the skin and mucous membrane can result in the rapid dissemination of bacterial pathogen throughout the body .
localize infection may also spread to the bloodstream , cause serious and often fatal systemic infection .
figure two  five  .  one  eight and figure two  five  .  one  nine summarize the major characteristic of bacterial infection of the circulatory and lymphatic system .
disease profile chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  three  seven figure two  five  .  one  eight
one  one  three  eight chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  five  .  one  nine
two  five  .  three viral infections of the circulatory and lymphatic chapter two  five
 circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  three  nine systems learning objectives
 identify common viral pathogen that cause infection of the circulatory and lymphatic system  compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease affect the circulatory and lymphatic system viral pathogen of the circulatory system vary tremendously both in - pron - virulence and distribution worldwide .
some of these pathogen be practically global in - pron - distribution .
fortunately , the most ubiquitous virus tend to produce the mildest form of disease .
in the majority of case , those infect remain asymptomatic .
on the other hand , other virus be associate with life - threaten disease that have impact human history .
infectious mononucleosis and burkitt lymphoma
human herpesvirus four , also know as epstein - barr virus ( ebv ) , have be associate with a variety of human disease , such as mononucleosis and burkitt lymphoma .
exposure to the human herpesvirus four
( hhv -  four ) be widespread and nearly all people have be expose at some time in - pron - childhood , as evidence by serological test on population .
the virus primarily reside within b lymphocyte and , like all herpe virus , can remain dormant in a latent state for a long time .
when uninfected young adult be expose to ebv , - pron - may experience infectious mononucleosis .
the virus be mainly spread through contact with body fluid ( e . g . , saliva , blood , and seman ) .
the main symptom include pharyngitis , fever , fatigue , and lymph node swell .
abdominal pain may also occur as a result of spleen and liver enlargement in the second or third week of infection .
the disease typically be self - limit after about a month .
the main symptom , extreme fatigue , can continue for several month , however .
complication in immunocompetent patient be rare but can include jaundice , anemia , and possible rupture of the spleen cause by enlargement .
in patient with malaria or hiv , epstein - barr virus can lead to a fast - grow malignant cancer know as burkitt lymphoma
( figure two  five  .  two  zero ) .
this condition be a form of non - hodgkin lymphoma that produce solid tumor chiefly consist of aberrant b cell .
burkitt lymphoma be more common in africa , where prevalence of hiv and malaria be high , and - pron - more frequently afflict child .
repeat episode of viremia cause by reactivation of the virus be common in immunocompromised individual .
in some patient with aids , ebv may induce the formation of malignant b - cell lymphoma or oral hairy leukoplakia .
immunodeficiency - associate burkitt lymphoma primarily occur in patient with hiv .
hiv infection , similar to malaria , lead to polyclonal b - cell activation and permit poorly control proliferation of ebv+ b cell , lead to the formation of lymphoma .
infectious mononucleosis be typically diagnose base on the initial clinical symptom and a test for antibody to ebv - associate antigen .
because the disease be self - limit , antiviral treatment be rare for mononucleosis .
case of burkitt lymphoma be diagnose from a biopsy specimen from a lymph node or tissue from a suspect tumor .
stage of the cancer include compute tomography ( ct ) scan of the chest , abdoman , pelvi , and cytologic and histologic evaluation of biopsy specimen .
because the tumor grow so rapidly , staging study must be expedite and treatment must be initiate promptly .
an intensive alternate regiman of cyclophosphamide , vincristine , doxorubicin , methotrexate , ifosfamide , etoposide , and cytarabine ( codox - m / ivac ) plus rituximab result in a cure rate great than nine  zero % for child and adult .
one  one  four  zero
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  five  .  two  zero
( a ) burkitt lymphoma can cause large tumor .
( b ) characteristic irregularly shape abnormal lymphocyte ( large purple cell ) with vacuole ( white spot ) from a fine - needle aspirate of a tumor from a patient with burkitt lymphoma .
( credit a  modification of work by bi cf , tang y , zhang wy , zhao s , wang xq , yang qp , li gd , and liu wp  credit b  modification of work by ed uthman )
cytomegalovirus infections also know as cytomegalovirus ( cmv ) , human herpesvirus five ( hhv -  five ) be a virus with high infection rate in the human population .
- pron - be currently estimate that five  zero % of people in the us have be infect by the time - pron - reach adulthood . [ two  seven ]
cmv be the major cause of non - epstein - barr infectious mononucleosis in the general human population .
- pron - be also an important pathogen in immunocompromised host , include patient with aids , neonate , and transplant recipient .
however , the vast majority of cmv infection be asymptomatic .
in adult , if symptom do occur , - pron - typically include fever , fatigue , swollen gland , and pharyngitis .
cmv can be transmit between individual through contact with body fluid such as saliva or urine .
common mode of transmission include sexual contact , nursing , blood transfusion , and organ transplant .
in addition , pregnant woman with active infection frequently pass this virus to - pron - fetus , result in congenital cmv infection , which occur in approximately one in every one  five  zero infant in us . [ two  eight ]
infant can also be infect during passage through the birth canal or through breast milk and saliva from the mother .
perinatal infection tend to be milder but can occasionally cause lung , spleen , or liver damage .
serious symptom in newborn include growth retardation , jaundice , deafness , blindness , and mental retardation if the virus cross the placenta during the embryonic state when the body system be develop in utero .
however , a majority ( approximately eight  zero % ) of infect infant will never have symptom or experience long - term problems . [ two  nine ] diagnosis of cmv infection during pregnancy be usually achieve by serology  cmv be the " c " in prenatal torch screening .
many patient receive blood transfusion and nearly all those receive kidney transplant ultimately become infected with cmv .
approximately six  zero % of transplant recipient will have cmv infection and more than two  zero % will develop symptomatic disease . [ three  zero ]
these infection may result from cmv - contaminate tissue but also may be a consequence of immunosuppression require for transplantation cause reactivation of prior cmv infection .
the result viremia can lead to fever and leukopenia , a decrease in the number of white blood cell in the bloodstream .
two  seven .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
cytomegalovirus ( cmv ) and congenital cmv infection 
about cmv .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / cmv / transmission . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
two  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
cytomegalovirus ( cmv ) and congenital cmv infection 
baby bear with cmv ( congenital cmv infection ) .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / cmv / congenital - infection . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
two  nine . ibid .
three  zero .
e . cordero et al .
“ cytomegalovirus disease in kidney transplant recipients 
incidence , clinical profile , and risk factors .
” transplantation proceedings four  four
no .
three
( two  zero  one  two  )  six  nine  four – seven  zero  zero .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic
system infections one  one  four  one serious consequence may include liver damage , transplant rejection , and death .
for similar reason , many patient with aids develop active cmv infection that can manifest as encephalitis or progressive retinitis lead to blindness . [ three  one ]
diagnosis of a localized cmv infection can be achieve through direct microscopic evaluation of tissue specimen stain with routine stain ( e . g . , wright - giemsa , hematoxylin and eosin , papanicolaou ) and immunohistochemical stain .
cell infect by cmv produce characteristic inclusion with an " owl ' s eye " appearance  this sign be less sensitive than molecular method like pcr but more predictive of localized disease ( figure two  five  .  two  one ) .
for more severe cmv infection , test such as enzyme immunoassay ( eia ) , indirect immunofluorescence antibody ( ifa ) test , and pcr , which be base on detection of cmv antigen or dna , have a high sensitivity and can determine viral load .
cultivation of the virus from saliva or urine be still the method for detect cmv in newborn baby up to three week old .
ganciclovir , valganciclovir , foscarnet , and cidofovir be the first - line antiviral drug for serious cmv infection .
figure two  five  .  two  one cell infect with cmv become enlarged and have a characteristic " owl 's eye " nucleus .
this micrograph show kidney cell from a patient with cmv .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

compare the disease cause by hhv -  four and hhv -  five .
arthropod - borne viral diseases
there be a number of arthropod - bear virus , or arbovirus , that can cause human disease .
among these be several important hemorrhagic fever transmit by mosquito .
- pron - will discuss three that pose serious threat  yellow fever , chikungunya fever , and dengue fever .
yellow fever yellow fever be once common in the us and cause several serious outbreak between one  seven  zero  zero and one  nine  zero  zero  . [ three  two ]
through three  one .
l . m . mofenson et al .
“ guidelines for the prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections among hiv - expose and hiv - infected child  recommendation from cdc , the national institutes of health , the hiv medicine association of the infectious diseases society of america , the pediatric infectious diseases society , and the american academy of pediatrics .
”
mmwr recommendations and report
five  eight no .
rr -  one  one
( two  zero  zero  nine  )  one – one  six  six .
three  two .
center for disease control and prevention .
"
history timeline transcript .
"
http / / www . cdc . gov / travel - training / local / one  one  four  two chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five vector control effort , however , this disease have be eliminate in the us .
currently , yellow fever occur primarily in tropical and subtropical area in south america and africa .
- pron - be cause by the yellow fever virus of the genus flavivirus ( name for the latin word flavus mean yellow ) , which be transmit to human by mosquito vector .
sylvatic yellow fever occur in tropical jungle region of africa and central and south america , where the virus can be transmit from infect monkey to human by the mosquito aedes africanus or haemagogus spp .
in urban area , the aedes aegypti mosquito be mostly responsible for transmit the virus between human .
most individual infect with yellow fever virus have no illness or only mild disease .
onset of milder symptom be sudden , with dizziness , fever of three  nine – four  zero ° c ( one  zero  two – one  zero  four ° f ) , chill , headache , and myalgia .
as symptom worsen , the face become flushed , and nausea , vomiting , constipation , severe fatigue , restlessness , and irritability be common .
mild disease may resolve after one to three day .
however , approximately one  five % of case progress to develop moderate to severe yellow fever disease . [ three  three ]
in moderate or severe disease , the fever fall suddenly two to five day after onset , but recur several hour or day later .
symptom of jaundice , petechial rash , mucosal hemorrhage , oliguria ( scant urine ) , epigastric tenderness with bloody vomit , confusion , and apathy also often occur for approximately seven day of moderate to severe disease .
after more than a week , patient may have a rapid recovery and no sequelae .
in - pron - most severe form , call malignant yellow fever , symptom include delirium , bleeding , seizure , shock , coma , and multiple organ failure  in some case , death occur .
patient with malignant yellow fever also become severely immunocompromised , and even those in recovery may become susceptible to bacterial superinfection and pneumonia .
of the one  five % of patient who develop moderate or severe disease , up to half may die .
diagnosis of yellow fever be often base on clinical sign and symptom and , if applicable , the patient 's travel history , but infection can be confirm by culture , serologic test , and pcr .
there be no effective treatment for patient with yellow fever .
whenever possible , patient with yellow fever should be hospitalize for close observation and give supportive care .
prevention be the good method of control yellow fever .
use of mosquito netting , window screen , insect repellent , and insecticide be all effective method of reduce exposure to mosquito vector .
an effective vaccine be also available , but in the us , - pron - be only administer to those travel to area with endemic yellow fever .
in west africa , the world health organization ( who ) launch a yellow fever initiative in two  zero  zero  six and , since that time , significant progress have be make in combat yellow fever .
more than one  zero  five million people have be vaccinate , and no outbreak of yellow fever be report in west africa in two  zero  one  five .
yellow fever 
alter the course of history yellow
fever originate in africa and be still most prevalent there today .
this disease be think to have be translocate to the americas by the slave trade in the one  six th century . [ three  four ]
since that time , yellow fever have be associate with many severe outbreak , some of which have important impact upon historic event .
yellow fever virus be once an important cause of disease in the us .
in the summer of one  seven  nine  three , there be a serious outbreak in philadelphia ( then the us capitol ) .
- pron - be estimate that five  ,  zero  zero  zero people ( one  zero % of the city 's population ) die .
all of the government official , include george washington , flee the city in the face of this epidemic .
the disease only abate when autumn frost kill the mosquito vector population .
in one  eight  zero  two , napoleon bonaparte send an army of four  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero to hispaniola to suppress a slave revolution .
this be see by many as a part of a plan to use the louisiana territory as a granary as - pron - reestablish france as a global power .
yellow fever , however , decimate - pron - army and - pron - be force to withdraw .
abandon - pron - aspiration in the new world , napoleon sell the louisiana territory to the us for $ one  five million in one  eight  zero  three .
micro connections historyepidemiologyandvaccination / historytimelinetranscript . pdf .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
three  three .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ yellow fever , symptoms and treatment .
"
two  zero  one  five http / / www . cdc . gov / yellowfever / symptom / index . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
three  four .
j . t . cathey , j . s . marr .
“
yellow fever , asia and the east african slave trade .
"
transaction of the royal society of tropical medicine chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  four  three
the most famous historic event associate with yellow fever be probably the construction of the panama canal .
the french begin work on the canal in the early one  eight  eight  zero s .
however , engineering problem , malaria , and yellow fever force - pron - to abandon the project .
the us take over the task in one  nine  zero  four and open the canal a decade later .
during those one  zero year , yellow fever be a constant adversary .
in the first few year of work , great than eight  zero % of the american worker in panama be hospitalize with yellow fever .
- pron - be the work of carlos finlay and walter reed that turn the tide .
take together , - pron - work demonstrate that the disease be transmit by mosquito .
vector control measure succeed in reduce both yellow fever and malaria rate and contribute to the ultimate success of the project .
dengue fever
the disease dengue fever , also know as breakbone fever , be cause by four serotype of dengue virus call dengue one – four .
these be flavivirus specie that be transmit to human by a . aegypti or a . albopictus mosquito .
the disease be distribute worldwide but be predominantly locate in tropical region .
the who estimate that five  zero million to one  zero  zero million infection occur yearly , include five  zero  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero dengue hemorrhagic fever ( dhf ) case and two  two  ,  zero  zero  zero death , most among children . [ three  five ] dengue fever be primarily a self - limit disease characterize by abrupt onset of high fever up to four  zero ° c ( one  zero  four ° f ) , intense headache , rash , slight nose or gum bleeding , and extreme muscle , joint , and bone pain , cause patient to feel as if - pron - bone be break , which be the reason this disease be also refer to as breakbone fever .
as the body temperature return to normal , in some patient , sign of dengue hemorrhagic fever may develop that include drowsiness , irritability , severe abdominal pain , severe nose or gum bleeding , persistent vomiting , vomit blood , and black tarry stool , as the disease progress to dhf or dengue shock syndrome ( dss ) .
patient who develop dhf experience circulatory system failure cause by increase blood vessel permeability .
patient with dengue fever can also develop dss from vascular collapse because of the severe drop in blood pressure .
patient who develop dhf or dss be at great risk for death without prompt appropriate supportive treatment .
about three  zero % of patient with severe hemorrhagic disease with poor supportive treatment die , but mortality can be less than one % with experienced support . [ three  six ] diagnostic test for dengue fever include serologic testing , elisa , and reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain reaction ( rt - pcr ) of blood .
there be no specific treatment for dengue fever , nor be there a vaccine .
instead , supportive clinical care be provide to treat the symptom of the disease .
the good way to limit the impact of this viral pathogen be vector control .
chikungunya fever
the arboviral disease chikungunya fever be cause by chikungunya virus ( chikv ) , which be transmit to human by a . aegypti and a . albopictus mosquito .
until two  zero  one  three , the disease have not be report outside of africa , asia , and a few european country  however , chikv have now spread to mosquito population in north and south america .
chikungunya fever be characterize by high fever , joint pain , rash , and blister , with joint pain persist for several month .
these infection be typically self - limit and rarely fatal .
the diagnostic approach for chikungunya fever be similar to that for dengue fever .
virus can be culture directly from patient serum during early infection .
ifa , eia , elisa , pcr , and rt - pcr be available to detect chikv antigen and patient antibody response to the infection .
there be no specific treatment for this disease except to manage symptom with fluid , analgesic , and bed rest .
as with most arbovirus , the good strategy for combat the disease be vector control .
and hygiene one  zero  eight , no . five ( two  zero  one  four  )  two  five  two – two  five  seven . three  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“ dengue , epidemiology .
"
two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . cdc . gov / dengue / epidemiology / index . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
three  six .
c . r . pringle “ dengue .
"
msd manual 
consumer version .
https / / www . msdmanuals . com / home / infections / viral - infections / dengue .
two  zero  one  six .
accessed sept one  five , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  four  four chapter two  five
 circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five use this interactive map ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two denguemap ) to explore the global distribution of dengue .

name three arboviral disease and explain why - pron - be so name .

what be the good method for control outbreak of arboviral disease ?
ebola virus disease
the ebola virus disease ( evd ) be a highly contagious disease cause by specie of ebolavirus , a bsl -  four filovirus ( figure two  five  .  two  two ) .
transmission to human occur through direct contact with body fluid ( e . g . , blood , saliva , sweat , urine , fece , or vomit ) , and indirect contact by contaminated fomite .
infected patient can easily transmit ebola virus to other if appropriate containment and use of personal protective equipment be not available or use .
handle and work with patient with evd be extremely hazardous to the general population and health - care worker .
in almost every evd outbreak there have be ebola infection among health - care worker .
this ease of ebola virus transmission be recently demonstrate in the ebola epidemic in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone in two  zero  one  four , in which more than two  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero people in one  zero country be infect and more than one  one  ,  zero  zero  zero died . [ three  seven ]
after infection , the initial symptom of ebola be unremarkable  fever , severe headache , myalgia , cough , chest pain , and pharyngitis .
as the disease progress , patient experience abdominal pain , diarrhea , and vomiting .
hemorrhaging begin after about three day , with bleed occur in the gastrointestinal tract , skin , and many other site .
this often lead to delirium , stupor , and coma , accompany by shock , multiple organ failure , and death .
the mortality rate of evd often range from five  zero % to nine  zero % .
the initial diagnosis of ebola be difficult because the early symptom be so similar to those of many other illness .
- pron - be possible to directly detect the virus from patient sample within a few day after symptom begin , use antigen - capture elisa , immunoglobulin m ( igm ) elisa , pcr , and virus isolation .
there be currently no effective , approved treatment for ebola other than supportive care and proper isolation technique to contain - pron - spread .
link to learning three  seven .
healthmap .
"
two  zero  one  four ebola outbreaks .
"
http / / www . healthmap . org / ebola / #timeline .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  four  five figure two  five  .  two  two
an ebola virus particle view with electron microscopy .
these filamentous virus often exhibit loop or hooked end .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )

how be ebola transmit ?
hantavirus
the genus hantavirus consist of at least four serogroup with nine virus cause two major clinical ( sometimes overlapping ) syndrome 
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome ( hps ) in north america and hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome ( hfrs ) in other continent .
hantaviruse be find throughout the world in wild rodent that shed the virus in - pron - urine and fece .
transmission occur between rodent and to human through inhalation of aerosol of the rodent urine and fece .
hantaviruse associate with outbreak in the us and canada be transmit by the deer mouse , white - footed mouse , or cotton rat .
hps begin as a nonspecific flu - like illness with headache , fever , myalgia , nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , and abdominal pain .
patient rapidly develop pulmonary edema and hypotension result in pneumonia , shock , and death , with a mortality rate of up to five  zero % . [ three  eight ]
this virus can also cause hfrs , which have not be report in the us .
the initial symptom of this condition include high fever , headache , chill , nausea , inflammation or redness of the eye , or a rash .
later symptom be hemorrhage , hypotension , kidney failure , shock , and death .
the mortality rate of hfrs can be as high as one  five % . [ three  nine ] elisa , western blot , rapid immunoblot strip assay ( riba ) , and rt - pcr detect host antibody or viral protein produce during infection .
immunohistological staining may also be use to detect the presence of viral antigen .
there be no clinical treatment other than general supportive care available for hps infection .
patient with hfrs can be treat with ribavirin . [ four  zero ] 
compare the two hantavirus disease discuss in this section .
three  eight .
world health organization .
“ hantavirus diseases .
” two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / ith / disease / hantavirus / en / . accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
three  nine . ibid .
four  zero .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
hantavirus  treatment .
" two  zero  one  two .
http / / www . cdc . gov / hantavirus / technical / hps / treatment . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  four  six
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five human immunodeficiency virus human t - lymphotropic virus ( htlv ) , also call human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) be retrovirus that be the causative agent of acquire immune deficiency syndrome ( aids ) .
there be two main variant of human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) .
hiv -  one ( figure two  five  .  two  three ) occur in human population worldwide , whereas hiv -  two be concentrate inwest africa .
currently , the most affected region in the world be sub - saharan africa , with an estimate two  five  .  six million people live with hiv in two  zero  one  five  . [ four  one ]
sub - saharan africa also account for two - third of the global total of new hiv infection ( figure two  five  .  two  four  ) . [ four  two ] figure two  five  .  two  three
this micrograph show hiv particle ( green ) bud from a lymphocyte ( top right ) .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) four  one .
world health organization .
“ hiv / aids  fact sheet .
" two  zero  one  six  . http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs three  six  zero  / en / .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
four  two . ibid .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  four  seven figure two  five  .  two  four
this map show the prevalence of hiv worldwide in two  zero  one  five among adult age one  five – four  nine year .
hiv be spread through direct contact with body fluid .
casual contact and insect vector be not sufficient for disease transmission  common mode of transmission include sexual contact and sharing of needle by intravenous ( iv ) drug user .
- pron - generally take many year before the effect of an hiv infection be detect .
hiv infection be not dormant during this period  virion be continually produce , and the immune system continually attempt to clear the viral infection , while the virus persistently infect additional cd four t cell .
over time , the cd four t - cell population be devastate , ultimately lead to aids .
when people be infect with hiv , - pron - disease progress through three stage base on cd four t - cell count and the presence of clinical symptom ( figure two  five  .  two  five ) .

stage one  acute hiv infection .
two to four week after infection with hiv , patient may experience a flulike illness , which can last for a few week .
patient with acute hiv infection have more than five  zero  zero cell / μl cd four t cell and a large amount of virus in - pron - blood .
patient be very contagious during this stage .
to confirm acute infection , either a fourth - generation antibody - antigen test or a nucleic acid test ( nat ) must be perform .

stage two  clinical latency .
during this period , hiv enter a period of dormancy .
patient have between two  zero  zero and four  nine  nine cell / μl cd four t cell  hiv be still active but reproduce at low level , and patient may not experience any symptom of illness .
for patient who be not take medicine to treat hiv , this period can last a decade or long .
for patient receive antiretroviral therapy , the stage may last for several decade , and those with low level of the virus in - pron - blood be much less likely to transmit hiv than those who be not virally suppress .
near the end of the latent stage , the patient 's viral load start to increase and the cd four t - cell count begin to decrease , lead to the development of symptom and increase susceptibility to opportunistic infection .

stage three  acquire immunodeficiency syndrome ( aids ) .
patient be diagnose with aids when - pron - cd four t - cell count drop below two  zero  zero cell / μl or when - pron - develop certain opportunistic illness .
during this stage , the immune system become severely damage by hiv .
common symptom of aids include chill , fever , sweat , swollen lymph gland , weakness , and weight loss  in addition , patient often develop rare cancer such as kaposi 's sarcoma and opportunistic infection such as pneumocystis pneumonia , tuberculosis , cryptosporidiosis , and toxoplasmosis .
this be a fatal progression that , in the terminal stage , include waste one  one  four  eight chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five syndrome and dementia complex .
patient with aids have a high viral load and be highly infectious  - pron - typically survive about three year without treatment .
figure two  five  .  two  five
this graph show the clinical progression of cd four t cell ( blue line ) , clinical symptom , and viral rna ( red line ) during an hiv infection .
( credit  modification of work by kogan m , and rappaport j )
the initial diagnosis of hiv be perform use a serological test for antibody production against the pathogen .
positive test result be confirm by western blot or pcr test .
- pron - can take week or month for the body to produce antibody in response to an infection .
there be fourth - generation test that detect hiv antibody and hiv antigen that be present even before the body begin produce antibody .
nucleic acid test ( nats ) be a third type of test that be relatively expensive and uncommon  nat can detect hiv in blood and determine the viral load .
as a consequence of provirus formation , - pron - be currently not possible to eliminate hiv from an infected patient 's body .
elimination by specific antibody be ineffective because the virus mutate rapidly
-
a result of the error - prone reverse transcriptase and the inability to correct error .
antiviral treatment , however , can greatly extend life expectancy .
to combat the problem of drug resistance , combination of antiretroviral drug call antiretroviral therapy ( art ) , sometimes call highly active art or combine art , be use .
there be several different target for antiviral drug action ( and a grow list of drug for each of these target ) .
one class of drug inhibit hiv entry  other class inhibit reverse transcriptase by block viral rna - dependent and dna - dependent dna polymerase activity  and still other inhibit one of the three hiv enzyme need to replicate inside human cell .

why be - pron - not yet possible to cure hiv infection ?
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system
infections one  one  four  nine hiv , aids , and education
when the first outbreak of aids in the us occur in the early one  nine  eight  zero s , very little be know about the disease or - pron - origin .
erroneously , the disease quickly become stigmatize as one associate with what become identify as at - risk behavior such as sexual promiscuity , homosexuality , and iv drug use , even though mount evidence indicate the disease be also contract through transfusion of blood and blood product or by fetus of infect mother .
in the mid -  one  nine  eight  zero , scientist elucidate the identity of the virus , - pron - mode of transmission , and mechanism of pathogenesis .
campaign be undertake to educate the public about how hiv spread to stem infection rate and encourage behavioral change that reduce the risk for infection .
approach to this campaign , however , emphasize very different strategy .
some group favor educational program that emphasize sexual abstinence , monogamy , heterosexuality , and “ just say no to drug .
"
other group place an emphasis on " safe sex " in sex education program and advocate social service program that pass out free condom to anyone , include sexually active minor , and provide needle exchange program for iv drug user .
these be clear example of the intersection between disease and cultural value .
as a future health professional , what be - pron - responsibility in term of educate patient about behavior that put - pron - at risk for hiv or other disease while possibly set - pron - own personal opinion aside ?
- pron - will no doubt encounter patient whose cultural and moral value differ from - pron - own .
be - pron - ethical for - pron - to promote - pron - own moral agenda to - pron - patient ?
how can - pron - advocate for practical disease prevention while still respect the personal view of - pron - patient ?
viral diseases of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
many virus be able to cause systemic , difficult - to - treat infection because of - pron - ability to replicate within the host .
some of the more common virus that affect the circulatory system be summarize in figure two  five  .  two  six .
eye on ethics disease profile one  one  five  zero
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
two  five  .  two  six chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  five  one two  five  .  four parasitic infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems learning objectives
 identify common parasite that cause infection of the circulatory and lymphatic system  compare the major characteristic of specific parasitic disease affect the circulatory and lymphatic system some protozoa and parasitic fluke be also capable of cause infection of the human circulatory system .
although these infection be rare in the us , - pron - continue to cause widespread suffering in the develop world today .
fungal infection of the circulatory system be very rare .
therefore , - pron - be not discuss in this chapter .
malaria
despite more than a century of intense research and clinical advancement , malaria remain one of the most important infectious disease in the world today .
- pron - widespread distribution place more than half of the world 's population in jeopardy .
in two  zero  one  five , the who estimate there be about two  one  four million case of malaria worldwide , result in about four  three  eight  ,  zero  zero  zero death  about eight  eight % of case and nine  one % of death occur in africa . [ four  three ]
although malaria be not currently a major threat in the us , the possibility of - pron - reintroduction be a concern .
malaria be cause by several protozoan parasite in the genus plasmodium  p . falciparum , p . knowlesi , p . malariae , p . ovale , and p . vivax .
plasmodium primarily infect red blood cell and be transmit through the bite of anopheles mosquito .
currently , p . falciparum be the most common and most lethal cause of malaria , often call falciparum malaria .
falciparum malaria be widespread in highly populated region of africa and asia , put many people at risk for the most severe form of the disease .
the classic sign and symptom of malaria be cycle of extreme fever and chill .
the sudden , violent symptom of malaria start with malaise , abrupt chill , and fever ( three  nine – four  one ° c [ one  zero  two  .  two – one  zero  five  .  eight ° f ] ) , rapid and faint pulse , polyuria , headache , myalgia , nausea , and vomiting .
after two to six hour of these symptom , the fever fall , and profuse sweat occur for two to three hour , follow by extreme fatigue .
these symptom be a result of plasmodium emerge from red blood cell synchronously , lead to simultaneous rupture of a large number of red blood cell , result in damage to the spleen , liver , lymph node , and bone marrow .
the organ damage result from hemolysis cause patient to develop sludge blood ( i . e . , blood in which the red blood cell agglutinate into clump ) that can lead to lack of oxygen , necrosis of blood vessel , organ failure , and death .
in established infection , malarial cycle of fever and chill typically occur every two day in the disease describe as tertian malaria , which be cause by p . vivax and p . ovale .
the cycle occur every three day in the disease describe as quartan malaria , which be cause by p . malariae .
these interval may vary among case .
plasmodium have a complex life cycle that include several developmental stage alternately produce in mosquito and human ( figure two  five  .  two  seven ) .
when an infected mosquito take a blood meal , sporozoite in the mosquito salivary gland be inject into the host 's blood .
these parasite circulate to the liver , where - pron - develop into schizont .
the schizont then undergo schizogony , result in the release of many merozoite at once .
the merozoite move to the bloodstream and infect red blood cell .
inside red blood cell , merozoite develop into trophozoite that produce more merozoite .
the synchronous release of merozoite from red blood cell in the evening lead to the symptom of malaria .
in addition , some trophozoite alternatively develop into male and female gametocyte .
the gametocyte be take up when the mosquito take a blood meal from an infect individual .
sexual sporogony occur in the gut of the mosquito .
the gametocyte fuse to form zygote in the insect gut .
the zygote become motile and elongate into an ookinete .
this form penetrate the midgut wall and develop into an oocyst .
finally , the oocyst release new four  three .
world health organization .
“
world malaria report two  zero  one  five  summary .
" two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . who . int / malaria / publication / world - malariareport -
two  zero  one  five  / report / en / . accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  five  two chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five sporozoite that migrate to the mosquito salivary gland to complete the life cycle .
diagnosis of malaria be by microscopic observation of developmental form of plasmodium in blood smear and rapid eia assay that detect plasmodium antigen or enzyme ( figure two  five  .  two  eight ) .
drug such as chloroquine , atovaquone , artemether , and lumefantrine may be prescribe for both acute and prophylactic therapy , although some plasmodium spp . have show resistance to antimalarial drug .
use of insecticide and insecticide - treat bed net can limit the spread of malaria .
despite effort to develop a vaccine for malaria , none be currently available .
figure two  five  .  two  seven
the life cycle of plasmodium .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  five  three figure two  five  .  two  eight
a blood smear ( human blood stage ) show an early trophozoite in a delicate ring form ( upper left ) and an early stage schizont form ( center ) of plasmodium falciparum from a patient with malaria .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention ) visit this site ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two plasmodium ) to learn how the parasite plasmodium infect red blood cell .
the nothing
but net campaign , an initiative of the united nations foundation , have partner with the bill and melinda gates foundation to make mosquito bed net available in develop country in africa .
visit - pron - website ( https / / openstax . org / l /  two  two mosquitonet ) to learn more about - pron - effort to prevent malaria .

why be malaria one of the most important infectious disease ?
toxoplasmosis
the disease toxoplasmosis be cause by the protozoan toxoplasma gondii .
t . gondii be find in a wide variety of bird and mammals , [ four  four ] and human infection be common .
the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimate that two  two  .  five % of the population one  two year and old have be infect with t . gondii  but immunocompetent individual be typically asymptomatic , however . [ four  five ] domestic cat be the only know definitive host for the sexual stage of t . gondii and , thus , be the main reservoir of infection .
infect cat shed t . gondii oocyst in - pron - fece , link to learning four  four .
a . m . tenter et al . .
"
toxoplasma gondii  from animal to humans .
"
international journal for parasitology three  zero
no .
one  two - one  three
( two  zero  zero  zero  )  one  two  one  seven – one  two  five  eight . four  five .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
parasites - toxoplasmosis ( toxoplasma infection ) .
epidemiology and risk factors .
"
two  zero  one  five http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / toxoplasmosis / epi . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  five  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five and these oocyst typically spread to human through contact with fecal matter on cat ' body , in litter box , or in garden bed where outdoor cat defecate .
t . gondii have a complex life cycle that involve multiple host .
the t . gondii life cycle begin when unsporulated oocyst be shed in the cat 's fece .
these oocyst take one – five day to sporulate in the environment and become infective .
intermediate host in nature include bird and rodent , which become infected after ingest soil , water , or plant material contaminate with the infective oocyst .
once ingest , the oocyst transform into tachyzoite that localize in the bird or rodent neural and muscle tissue , where - pron - develop into tissue cyst .
cat may become infected after consume bird and rodent harbor tissue cyst .
cat and other animal may also become infect directly by ingestion of sporulate oocyst in the environment .
interestingly , toxoplasma infection appear to be able to modify the host 's behavior .
mouse infect by toxoplasma lose - pron - fear of cat pheromone .
as a result , - pron - become easy prey for cat , facilitate the transmission of the parasite to the cat definitive host[ four  six ]
( figure two  five  .  two  nine ) .
toxoplasma infection in human be extremely common , but most infected people be asymptomatic or have subclinical symptom .
some study suggest that the parasite may be able to influence the personality and psychomotor performance of infect human , similar to the way - pron - modify behavior in other mammals . [ four  seven ]
when symptom do occur , - pron - tend to be mild and similar to those of mononucleosis .
however , asymptomatic toxoplasmosis can become problematic in certain situation .
cyst can lodge in a variety of human tissue and lie dormant for year .
reactivation of these quiescent infection can occur in immunocompromised patient follow transplantation , cancer therapy , or the development of an immune disorder such as aids .
in patient with aids who have toxoplasmosis , the immune system can not combat the growth of t . gondii in body tissue  as a result , these cyst can cause encephalitis , retinitis , pneumonitis , cognitive disorder , and seizure that can eventually be fatal .
toxoplasmosis can also pose a risk during pregnancy because tachyzoite can cross the placenta and cause serious infection in the develop fetus .
the extent of fetal damage result from toxoplasmosis depend on the severity of maternal disease , the damage to the placenta , the gestational age of the fetus when infect , and the virulence of the organism .
congenital toxoplasmosis often lead to fetal loss or premature birth and can result in damage to the central nervous system , manifest as mental retardation , deafness , or blindness .
consequently , pregnant woman be advise by the cdc to take particular care in prepare meat , gardening , and care for pet cats . [ four  eight ]
diagnosis of toxoplasmosis infection during pregnancy be usually achieve by serology include torch testing ( the “ t " in torch stand for toxoplasmosis ) .
diagnosis of congenital infection can also be achieve by detect t . gondii dna in amniotic fluid , use molecular method such as pcr .
in adult , diagnosis of toxoplasmosis can include observation of tissue cyst in tissue specimen .
tissue cyst may be observe in giemsa - orwright - stain biopsy specimen , and ct , magnetic resonance imaging , and lumbar puncture can also be use to confirm infection ( figure two  five  .  three  zero ) .
prevent infection be the good first - line defense against toxoplasmosis .
preventive measure include wash hand thoroughly after handle raw meat , soil , or cat litter , and avoid consumption of vegetable possibly contaminate with cat fece .
all meat should be cook to an internal temperature of seven  three  .  nine – seven  six  .  seven ° c ( one  six  five – one  seven  zero ° f ) .
most immunocompetent patient do not require clinical intervention for toxoplasma infection .
however , neonate , pregnant woman , and immunocompromise patient can be treat with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine - except during the first trimester of pregnancy , because these drug can cause birth defect .
spiramycin have be use safely to reduce transmission in pregnant woman with primary infection during the first trimester because - pron - do not cross the placenta .
four  six .
j . flegr .
“ effects of toxoplasma on human behavior .
”
schizophrenia bulletin three  three , no .
three ( two  zero  zero  seven  )  seven  five  seven – seven  six  zero . four  seven .
ibid four  eight .
center for disease control and prevention .
“
parasites - toxoplasmosis ( toxoplasma infection ) .
toxoplasmosis
frequently ask questions ( faq ) .
" two  zero  one  three .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / toxoplasmosis / gen_info / faqs . html .
accessed july two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  five  five figure two  five  .  two  nine
the infectious cycle of toxoplasma gondii .
( credit 
“ diagram "  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit “ cat "  modification of work by “ kacey nine  seven  zero  seven  eight ” / flickr )
one  one  five  six
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  five  .  three  zero ( a ) giemsa - stain toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite from a smear of peritoneal fluid obtain from a mouse inoculate with t . gondii .
tachyzoite be typically crescent shape with a prominent , centrally place nucleus .
( b ) microscopic cyst contain t . gondii from mouse brain tissue .
thousand of rest parasite ( stain red ) be contain in a thin parasite cyst wall .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by usda )

how do t . gondii infect human ?
babesiosis babesiosis be a rare zoonotic infectious disease cause by babesia spp .
these parasitic protozoan infect various wild and domestic animal and can be transmit to human by black - legged ixode tick .
in human , babesia infect red blood cell and replicate inside the cell until - pron - rupture .
the babesia release from the rupture red blood cell continue the growth cycle by invade other red blood cell .
patient may be asymptomatic , but those who do have symptom often initially experience malaise , fatigue , chill , fever , headache , myalgia , and arthralgia .
in rare case , particularly in asplenic ( absence of the spleen ) patient , the elderly , and patient with aids , babesiosis may resemble falciparum malaria , with high fever , hemolytic anemia , hemoglobinuria ( hemoglobin or blood in urine ) , jaundice , and renal failure , and the infection can be fatal .
previously acquire asymptomatic babesia infection may become symptomatic if a splenectomy be perform .
diagnosis be base mainly on the microscopic observation of parasite in blood smear ( figure two  five  .  three  one ) .
serologic and antibody detection by ifa can also be perform and pcr - base test be available .
many people do not require clinical intervention for babesia infection , however , serious infection can be clear with a combination of atovaquone and azithromycin or a combination of clindamycin and quinine .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  five  seven figure two  five  .  three  one
in this blood smear from a patient with babesiosis , babesia parasite can be observe in the red blood cell .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
chagas disease also call american trypanosomiasis , chagas disease be a zoonosis classify as a neglect tropical disease ( ntd ) .
- pron - be cause by the flagellate protozoan trypanosoma cruzi and be most commonly transmit to animal and people through the fece of triatomine bug .
the triatomine bug be nickname the kissing bug because - pron - frequently bite human on the face or around the eye  the insect often defecate near the bite and the infect fecal matter may be rub into the bite wind by the bite individual ( figure two  five  .  three  two ) .
the bite - pron - be painless and , initially , many people show no sign of the disease .
alternative mode of transmission include contaminate blood transfusion , organ transplant from infected donor , and congenital transmission from mother to fetus .
chagas disease be endemic throughout much of mexico , central america , and south america , where , accord to who , an estimate six million to seven million people be infected . [ four  nine ]
currently , chagas disease be not endemic in the us , even though triatomine bug be find in the southern half of the country .
triatomine bug typically be active at night , when - pron - take blood meal by bite the face and lip of people or animal as - pron - sleep and often defecate near the site of the bite .
infection occur when the host rub the fece into - pron - eye , mouth , the bite wound , or another break in the skin .
the protozoan then enter the blood and invade tissue of the heart and central nervous system , as well as macrophage and monocyte .
nonhuman reservoir of t . cruzi parasite include wild animal and domesticate animal such as dog and cat , which also act as reservoir of the pathogen . [ five  zero ]
there be three phase of chagas disease  acute , intermediate , and chronic .
these phase can be either asymptomatic or life - threaten depending on the immunocompetence status of the patient .
in acute phase disease , symptom include fever , headache , myalgia , rash , vomiting , diarrhea , and enlarge spleen , liver , and lymph node .
in addition , a localize nodule call a chagoma may form at the portal of entry , and swelling of the eyelid or the side of the face , call romaña ' s sign , may occur near the bite wound .
symptom of the acute phase may resolve spontaneously , but if untreated , the infection can persist in tissue , cause irreversible damage to the heart or brain .
in rare case , young child may die of myocarditis or meningoencephalitis during the acute phase four  nine .
world health organization .
“
chagas disease ( american trypanosomiasis ) .
fact sheet .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs three  four  zero  / en / . accessed july two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
five  zero .
c . e . reisenman et al .
“
infection of kissing bugs
with trypanosoma cruzi , tucson , arizona , usa .
"
emerge infectious diseases one  six
no .
three
( two  zero  one  zero  )  four  zero  zero – four  zero  five .
one  one  five  eight chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system
infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five of chagas disease .
follow the acute phase be a prolong intermediate phase during which few or no parasite be find in the blood and most people be asymptomatic .
many patient will remain asymptomatic for life  however , decade after exposure , an estimate two  zero %– three  zero % of infected people will develop chronic disease that can be debilitate and sometimes life threaten .
in the chronic phase , patient may develop painful swelling of the colon , lead to severe twisting , constipation , and bowel obstruction  painful swelling of the esophagus , lead to dysphagia and malnutrition  and flaccid cardiomegaly ( enlargement of the heart ) , which can lead to heart failure and sudden death .
diagnosis can be confirm through several different test , include direct microscopic observation of trypanosome in the blood , ifa , eia , pcr , and culture in artificial medium .
in endemic region , xenodiagnose may be use  this method involve allow uninfected kiss bug to feed on the patient and then examine - pron - fece for the presence of t . cruzi .
the medication nifurtimox and benznidazole be effective treatment during the acute phase of chagas disease .
the efficacy of these drug be much low when the disease be in the chronic phase .
avoid exposure to the pathogen through vector control be the most effective method of limit this disease .
figure two  five  .  three  two ( a )
trypanosoma cruzi protozoan in a blood smear from a patient with chagas disease .
( b )
the triatomine bug ( also know as the kiss bug or assassin bug ) be the vector of chagas disease .
( credit a  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by erwin huebner )

how do kiss bug infect human with trypanosoma cruzi ?
leishmaniasis
although - pron - be classify as an ntd , leishmaniasis be relatively widespread in tropical and subtropical region , affect people in more than nine  zero country .
- pron - be cause by approximately two  zero different specie of leishmania , protozoan parasite that be transmit by sand fly vector such as phlebotomus spp .
and lutzomyia spp .
dog , cat , sheep , horse , cattle rodent , and human can all serve as reservoir .
the leishmania protozoan be phagocytose by macrophage but use virulence factor to avoid destruction within the phagolysosome .
the virulence factor inhibit the phagolysosome enzyme that would otherwise destroy the parasite .
the parasite reproduce within the macrophage , lyse - pron - , and the progeny infect new macrophage ( see chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  five  nine micro connections  when phagocytosis fails ) .
the three major clinical form of leishmaniasis be cutaneous ( oriental sore , delhi boil , aleppo boil ) , visceral ( kalaazar , dumdum fever ) , and mucosal ( espundia ) .
the most common form of disease be cutaneous leishmaniasis , which be characterize by the formation of sore at the site of the insect bite that may start out as papule or nodule before become large ulcer ( figure two  five  .  three  three ) .
- pron - may take visceral leishmaniasis month and sometimes year to develop , lead to enlargement of the lymph node , liver , spleen , and bone marrow .
the damage to these body site trigger fever , weight loss , and swell of the spleen and liver .
- pron - also cause a decrease in the number of red blood cell ( anemia ) , white blood cell ( leukopenia ) , and platelet ( thrombocytopenia ) , cause the patient to become immunocompromised and more susceptible to fatal infection of the lung and gastrointestinal tract .
the mucosal form of leishmaniasis be one of the less common form of the disease .
- pron - cause a lesion similar to the cutaneous form but mucosal leishmaniasis be associate with mucous membrane of the mouth , naris , or pharynx , and can be destructive and disfiguring .
mucosal leishmaniasis occur less frequently when the original cutaneous ( skin ) infection be promptly treat .
definitive diagnosis of leishmaniasis be make by visualize organism in giemsa - stain smear , by isolate leishmania protozoan in culture , or by pcr - base assay of aspirate from infected tissue .
specific dna probe or analysis of culture parasite can help to distinguish leishmania specie that be cause simple cutaneous leishmaniasis from those capable of cause mucosal leishmaniasis .
cutaneous leishmaniasis be usually not treat .
the lesion will resolve after week ( or several month ) , but may result in scar .
recurrence rate be low for this disease .
more serious infection can be treat with stibogluconate ( antimony gluconate ) , amphotericin b , and miltefosine .
figure two  five  .  three  three ( a )
a micrograph of a tissue sample from a patient with localize cutaneous leishmaniasis .
parasitic leishmania mexicana ( black arrow ) be visible in and around the host cell .
( b ) large skin ulcer be associate with cutaneous leishmaniasis .
( credit a  modification of work by fernández - figueroa ea , rangel - escareño c , espinosa -
mateos v , carrillo - sánchez k , salaiza - suazo n , carrada - figueroa g , march - mifsut s , and becker i  credit b  modification of work by jean fortunet ) one  one  six  zero chapter two  five
 circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 compare the mucosal and cutaneous form of leishmaniasis .
schistosomiasis schistosomiasis ( bilharzia ) be an ntd cause by blood fluke in the genus schistosoma that be native to the caribbean , south america , middle east , asia , and africa .
most human schistosomiasis case be cause by schistosoma mansoni , s . haematobium , or s . japonicum .
schistosoma be the only trematode that invade through the skin  all other trematode infect by ingestion .
who estimate that at least two  five  eight million people require preventive treatment for schistosomiasis in two  zero  one  four  . [ five  one ]
infect human host shed schistosoma egg in urine and fece , which can contaminate freshwater habitat of snail that serve as intermediate host .
the egg hatch in the water , release miracidia , an intermediate growth stage of the schistosoma that infect the snail .
the miracidia mature and multiply inside the snail , transform into cercariae that leave the snail and enter the water , where - pron - can penetrate the skin of swimmer and bather .
the cercariae migrate through human tissue and enter the bloodstream , where - pron - mature into adult male and female worm that mate and release fertilize egg .
the egg travel through the bloodstream and penetrate various body site , include the bladder or intestine , from which - pron - be excrete in urine or stool to start the life cycle over again ( figure five  .  two  two ) .
a few day after infection , patient may develop a rash or itchy skin associate with the site of cercariae penetration .
within one – two month of infection , symptom may develop , include fever , chill , cough , and myalgia , as egg that be not excrete circulate through the body .
after year of infection , the egg become lodged in tissue and trigger inflammation and scarring that can damage the liver , central nervous system , intestine , spleen , lung , and bladder .
this may cause abdominal pain , enlargement of the liver , blood in the urine or stool , and problem pass urine .
increase risk for bladder cancer be also associate with chronic schistosoma infection .
in addition , child who be repeatedly infect can develop malnutrition , anemia , and learn difficulty .
diagnosis of schistosomiasis be make by the microscopic observation of egg in fece or urine , intestine or bladder tissue specimen , or serologic test .
the drug praziquantel be effective for the treatment of all schistosome infection .
improve wastewater management and educate at - risk population to limit exposure to contaminate water can help control the spread of the disease .
cercarial dermatitis
the cercaria of some specie of schistosoma can only transform into adult worm and complete - pron - life cycle in animal host such as migratory bird and mammal .
the cercaria of these worm be still capable of penetrate human skin , but - pron - be unable to establish a productive infection in human tissue .
still , the presence of the cercaria in small blood vessel trigger an immune response , result in itchy raise bump call cercarial dermatitis ( also know as swimmer 's itch or clam digger ' s itch ) .
although - pron - be uncomfortable , cercarial dermatitis be typically self - limit and rarely serious .
antihistamine and antipruritic can be use to limit inflammation and itching , respectively .

how do schistosome infection in human occur ?
five  one .
world health organization .
“
schistosomiasis .
fact sheet .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheet / fs one  one  five  / en / . accessed july two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  six  one common eukaryotic pathogens of the human circulatory system protozoan and helminthic infection be prevalent in the develop world .
a few of the more important parasitic infection be summarize in figure two  five  .  three  four .
disease profile one  one  six  two
chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure
two  five  .  three  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections one  one  six  three resolution
despite continued antibiotic treatment and the removal of the venous catheter , barbara 's condition further decline .
- pron - begin to show sign of shock and - pron - blood pressure drop to seven  seven  /  five  zero mmhg .
antiinflammatory drug and drotrecogin - α be administer to combat sepsis .
however , by the seventh day of hospitalization , barbara experience hepatic and renal failure and die .
staphylococcus aureus most likely form a biofilm on the surface of barbara 's catheter .
from there , the bacteria be chronically shed into - pron - circulation and produce the initial clinical symptom .
the chemotherapeutic therapy fail in large part because of the drug - resistant mrsa isolate .
virulence factor like leukocidin and hemolysin also interfere with - pron - immune response .
barbara 's ultimate decline may have be a consequence of the production of enterotoxin and toxic shock syndrome toxin ( tsst ) , which can initiate toxic shock .
venous catheter be common life - save intervention for many patient require long - term administration of medication or fluid .
however , - pron - be also common site of bloodstream infection .
the world health organization estimate that there be up to eight  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero catheter - relate bloodstream infection each year in the us , result in about two  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero deaths . [ five  two ] go back to the previous clinical focus box .
summary two  five  .  one anatomy of the circulatory and lymphatic systems

the circulatory system move blood throughout the body and have no normal microbiota .

the lymphatic system move fluid from the interstitial space of tissue toward the circulatory system and filter the lymph .
- pron - also have no normal microbiota .

the circulatory and lymphatic system be home to many component of the host immune defense .

infections of the circulatory system may occur after a break in the skin barrier or - pron - may enter the bloodstream at the site of a localize infection .
pathogen or toxin in the bloodstream can spread rapidly throughout the body and can provoke systemic and sometimes fatal inflammatory response such as sirs , sepsis , and endocarditis .

infections of the lymphatic system can cause lymphangitis and lymphadenitis .
two  five  .  two bacterial infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems

bacterial infection of the circulatory system be almost universally serious .
leave untreated , most have high mortality rate .

bacterial pathogen usually require a breach in the immune defense to colonize the circulatory system .
most often , this involve a wound or the bite of an arthropod vector , but - pron - can also occur in hospital setting and result in nosocomial infection .

sepsis from both gram - negative and gram - positive bacteria , puerperal fever , rheumatic fever , endocarditis , gas gangrene , osteomyelitis , and toxic shock syndrome be typically a result of injury or introduction of bacteria by medical or surgical intervention .

tularemia , brucellosis , cat - scratch fever , rat - bite fever , and bubonic plague be zoonotic disease transmit by biological vector 
ehrlichiosis , anaplasmosis , endemic and murine typhus , rocky mountain spot fever , lyme disease , relapse fever , and trench fever be transmit by arthropod vector .
clinical focus five  two .
world health organization .
“ patient safety , prevent bloodstream infections from central line venous catheters .
" two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / patientsafety / implementation / bsi / en / . accessed july two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
one  one  six  four chapter two  five  circulatory and lymphatic system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
because - pron - symptom be so similar to those of other disease , many bacterial infection of the circulatory system be difficult to diagnose .

standard antibiotic therapy be effective for the treatment of most bacterial infection of the circulatory system , unless the bacterium be resistant , in which case synergistic treatment may be require .

the systemic immune response to a bacteremia , which involve the release of excessive amount of cytokine , can sometimes be more damaging to the host than the infection - pron - .
two  five  .  three viral infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems

human herpesviruse such epstein - barr virus ( hhv -  four ) and cytomegalovirus ( hhv -  five ) be widely distribute .
the former be associate with infectious mononucleosis and burkitt lymphoma , and the latter can cause serious congenital infection as well as serious disease in immunocompromised adult .

arboviral disease such as yellow fever , dengue fever , and chikungunya fever be characterize by high fever and vascular damage that can often be fatal .
ebola virus disease be a highly contagious and often fatal infection spread through contact with bodily fluid .

although there be a vaccine available for yellow fever , treatment for patient with yellow fever , dengue , chikungunya fever , and ebola virus disease be limit to supportive therapy .

patients infect with human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) progress through three stage of disease , culminate in aids .
antiretroviral therapy ( art ) use various combination of drug to suppress viral load , extend the period of latency and reduce the likelihood of transmission .
 vector control and animal reservoir control remain the good defense against most virus that cause disease of the circulatory system .
two  five  .  four parasitic infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems

malaria be a protozoan parasite that remain an important cause of death primarily in the tropic .
several specie in the genus plasmodium be responsible for malaria and all be transmit by anopheles mosquito .
plasmodium infect and destroy human red blood cell , lead to organ damage , anemia , blood vessel necrosis , and death .
malaria can be treat with various antimalarial drug and prevent through vector control .

toxoplasmosis be a widespread protozoal infection that can cause serious infection in the immunocompromised and in develop fetus .
domestic cat be the definitive host .

babesiosis be a generally asymptomatic infection of red blood cell that can cause malaria - like symptom in elderly , immunocompromised , or asplenic patient .
 chagas disease be a tropical disease transmit by triatomine bug .
the trypanosome infect heart , neural tissue , monocyte , and phagocyte , often remain latent for many year before cause serious and sometimes fatal damage to the digestive system and heart .

leishmaniasis be cause by the protozoan leishmania and be transmit by sand fly .
symptom be generally mild , but serious case may cause organ damage , anemia , and loss of immune competence .

schistosomiasis be cause by a fluke transmit by snail .
the fluke move throughout the body in the blood stream and chronically infect various tissue , lead to organ damage .
chapter two  six nervous system infections figure two  six  .  one
this dog be exhibit the restlessness and aggression associate with rabie , a neurological disease that frequently affect mammal and can be transmit to human .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention ) chapter outline two  six  .  one anatomy of the nervous system two  six  .  two bacterial diseases of the nervous system two  six  .  three acellular diseases of the nervous system two  six  .  four fungal and parasitic diseases of the nervous system introduction few disease inspire the kind of fear that rabie do .
the name be derive from the latin word for " madness " or " fury , " most likely because animal infect with rabie may behave with uncharacteristic rage and aggression .
and while the thought of be attack by a rabid animal be terrify enough , the disease - pron - be even more frightful .
once symptom appear , the disease be almost always fatal , even when treat .
rabie be an example of a neurological disease cause by an acellular pathogen .
the rabie virus enter nervous tissue shortly after transmission and make - pron - way to the central nervous system , where - pron - presence lead to change in behavior and motor function .
well - know symptom associate with rabid animal include foam at the mouth , hydrophobia ( fear of water ) , and unusually aggressive behavior .
rabie claim ten of thousand of human life worldwide , mainly in africa and asia .
most human case result from dog bite , although many mammal specie can become infected and transmit the disease .
human infection rate be low in the united states and many other country as a result of control measure in animal population .
however , rabie be not the only disease with serious or fatal neurological effect .
in this chapter , - pron - examine the important microbial disease of the nervous system .
chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  six  nine
two  six  .  one anatomy of the nervous system
learning objectives
 describe the major anatomical feature of the nervous system 
explain why there be no normal microbiota of the nervous system

explain how microorganism overcome defense of the nervous system to cause infection  identify and describe general symptom associate with various infection of the nervous system
the human nervous system can be divide into two interact subsystem  the peripheral nervous system ( pns ) and the central nervous system ( cns ) .
the cns consist of the brain and spinal cord .
the peripheral nervous system be an extensive network of nerve connect the cns to the muscle and sensory structure .
the relationship of these system be illustrate in figure two  six  .  two .
the central nervous system
the brain be the most complex and sensitive organ in the body .
- pron - be responsible for all function of the body , include serve as the coordinate center for all sensation , mobility , emotion , and intellect .
protection for the brain be provide by the bone of the skull , which in turn be cover by the scalp , as show in figure two  six  .  three .
the scalp be compose of an outer layer of skin , which be loosely attach to the aponeurosis , a flat , broad tendon layer that anchor the superficial layer of the skin .
the periosteum , below the aponeurosis , firmly encase the bone of the skull and provide protection , nutrition to the bone , and the capacity for bone repair .
below the boney layer of the skull be three layer of membrane call meninge that surround the brain .
the relative position of these meninge be show in figure two  six  .  three .
the meningeal layer close to the bone of the skull be call the dura mater ( literally mean tough mother ) .
below the dura mater lie the arachnoid mater ( literally spider - like mother ) .
the innermost meningeal layer be a delicate membrane call the pia mater ( literally tender mother ) .
unlike the other meningeal layer , the pia mater firmly adhere to the convolute surface of the brain .
between the arachnoid mater and pia mater be the subarachnoid space .
the subarachnoid space within this region be fill with cerebrospinal fluid ( csf ) .
this watery fluid be produce by cell of the choroid plexus - area in each ventricle of the brain that consist of cuboidal epithelial cell surround dense capillary bed .
the csf serve to deliver nutrient and remove waste from neural tissue .
part one david be a three  five  - year - old carpenter from new jersey .
a year ago , - pron - be diagnose with crohn 's disease , a chronic inflammatory bowel disease that have no know cause .
- pron - have be take a prescription corticosteroid to manage the condition , and the drug have be highly effective in keep - pron - symptom at bay .
however , david recently fall ill and decide to visit - pron - primary care physician .
- pron - symptom include a fever , a persistent cough , and shortness of breath .
- pron - physician order a chest x - ray , which reveal consolidation of the right lung .
the doctor prescribe a course of levofloxacin and tell david to come back in a week if - pron - do not feel well .

what type of drug be levofloxacin ?

what type of microbe would this drug be effective against ?

what type of infection be consistent with david 's symptom ?
jump to the next clinical focus box .
clinical focus one  one  seven  zero chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  two
the essential component of the human nervous system be show in this illustration .
the central nervous system ( cns ) consist of the brain and spinal cord .
- pron - connect to the peripheral nervous system ( pns ) , a network of nerve that extend throughout the body .
figure two  six  .  three
the layer of tissue surround the human brain include three meningeal membrane  the dura mater , arachnoid mater , and pia mater .
( credit  modification of work by national institutes of health ) chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  seven  one
the blood - brain barrier
the tissue of the cns have extra protection in that - pron - be not expose to blood or the immune system in the same way as other tissue .
the blood vessel that supply the brain with nutrient and other chemical substance lie on top of the pia mater .
the capillary associate with these blood vessel in the brain be less permeable than those in other location in the body .
the capillary endothelial cell form tight junction that control the transfer of blood component to the brain .
in addition , cranial capillary have far few fenestra ( pore - like structure that be seal by a membrane ) and pinocytotic vesicle than other capillary .
as a result , material in the circulatory system have a very limited ability to interact with the cns directly .
this phenomenon be refer to as the blood - brain barrier .
the blood - brain barrier protect the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination , and can be quite effective at exclude potential microbial pathogen .
as a consequence of these defense , there be no normal microbiota in the cerebrospinal fluid .
the blood - brain barrier also inhibit the movement of many drug into the brain , particularly compound that be not lipid soluble .
this have profound ramification for treatment involve infection of the cns , because - pron - be difficult for drug to cross the blood - brain barrier to interact with pathogen that cause infection .
the spinal cord also have protective structure similar to those surround the brain .
within the bone of the vertebrae be meninge of dura mater ( sometimes call the dural sheath ) , arachnoid mater , pia mater , and a blood - spinal cord barrier that control the transfer of blood component from blood vessel associate with the spinal cord .
to cause an infection in the cns , pathogen must successfully breach the blood - brain barrier or blood - spinal cord barrier .
various pathogen employ different virulence factor and mechanism to achieve this , but - pron - can generally be group into four category  intercellular ( also call paracellular ) , transcellular , leukocyte facilitated , and nonhematogenous .
intercellular entry involve the use of microbial virulence factor , toxin , or inflammationmediate process to pass between the cell of the blood - brain barrier .
in transcellular entry , the pathogen pass through the cell of the blood - brain barrier use virulence factor that allow - pron - to adhere to and trigger uptake by vacuole - or receptor - mediate mechanism .
leukocyte - facilitate entry be a trojan - horse mechanism that occur when a pathogen infect peripheral blood leukocyte to directly enter the cns .
nonhematogenous entry allow pathogen to enter the brain without encounter the blood - brain barrier  - pron - occur when pathogen travel along either the olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerve that lead directly into the cns .
view this video ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two bldbrbarr ) about the bloodbrain barrier

what be the primary function of the blood - brain barrier ?
the peripheral nervous system
the pns be form of the nerve that connect organ , limb , and other anatomic structure of the body to the brain and spinal cord .
unlike the brain and spinal cord , the pns be not protect by bone , meninge , or a blood barrier , and , as a consequence , the nerve of the pns be much more susceptible to injury and infection .
microbial damage to peripheral nerve can lead to tingling or numbness know as neuropathy .
these symptom can also be produce by trauma and noninfectious cause such as drug or chronic disease like diabete .
link to learning one  one  seven  two chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
the cells of the nervous system tissues of the pns and cns be form of cell call glial cell ( neuroglial cell ) and neuron ( nerve cell ) .
glial cell assist in the organization of neuron , provide a scaffold for some aspect of neuronal function , and aid in recovery from neural injury .
neuron be specialized cell find throughout the nervous system that transmit signal through the nervous system use electrochemical process .
the basic structure of a neuron be show in figure two  six  .  four .
the cell body ( or soma ) be the metabolic center of the neuron and contain the nucleus and most of the cell 's organelle .
the many finely branched extension from the soma be call dendrite .
the soma also produce an elongate extension , call the axon , which be responsible for the transmission of electrochemical signal through elaborate ion transport process .
axon of some type of neuron can extend up to one meter in length in the human body .
to facilitate electrochemical signal transmission , some neuron have a myelin sheath surround the axon .
myelin , form from the cell membrane of glial cell like the schwann cell in the pns and oligodendrocyte in the cns , surround and insulate the axon , significantly increase the speed of electrochemical signal transmission along the axon .
the end of an axon form numerous branch that end in bulb call synaptic terminal .
neuron form junction with other cell , such as another neuron , with which - pron - exchange signal .
the junction , which be actually gap between neuron , be refer to as synapsis .
at each synapse , there be a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic neuron ( or other cell ) .
the synaptic terminal of the axon of the presynaptic terminal form the synapse with the dendrite , soma , or sometimes the axon of the postsynaptic neuron , or a part of another type of cell such as a muscle cell .
the synaptic terminal contain vesicle fill with chemical call neurotransmitter .
when the electrochemical signal move down the axon reach the synapse , the vesicle fuse with the membrane , and neurotransmitter be release , which diffuse across the synapse and bind to receptor on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell , potentially initiate a response in that cell .
that response in the postsynaptic cell may include further propagation of an electrochemical signal to transmit information or contraction of a muscle fiber .
figure two  six  .  four ( a )
a myelinate neuron be associate with oligodendrocyte .
oligodendrocyte be a type of glial cell that form the myelin sheath in the cns that insulate the axon so that electrochemical nerve impulse be transfer more efficiently .
( b )
a synapse consist of the axonal end of the presynaptic neuron ( top ) that release neurotransmitter that cross the synaptic space ( or cleft ) and bind to receptor on dendrite of the postsynaptic neuron ( bottom ) .
chapter two  six 
nervous system infections one  one  seven  three

what cell be associate with neuron , and what be - pron - function ?

what be the structure and function of a synapse ?
meningitis and encephalitis
although the skull provide the brain with an excellent defense , - pron - can also become problematic during infection .
any swelling of the brain or meninge that result from inflammation can cause intracranial pressure , lead to severe damage of the brain tissue , which have limit space to expand within the inflexible bone of the skull .
the term meningitis be use to describe an inflammation of the meninge .
typical symptom can include severe headache , fever , photophobia ( increase sensitivity to light ) , stiff neck , convulsion , and confusion .
an inflammation of brain tissue be call encephalitis , and patient exhibit sign and symptom similar to those of meningitis in addition to lethargy , seizure , and personality change .
when inflammation affect both the meninge and the brain tissue , the condition be call meningoencephaliti .
all three form of inflammation be serious and can lead to blindness , deafness , coma , and death .
meningitis and encephalitis can be cause by many different type of microbial pathogen .
however , these condition can also arise from noninfectious cause such as head trauma , some cancer , and certain drug that trigger inflammation .
to determine whether the inflammation be cause by a pathogen , a lumbar puncture be perform to obtain a sample of csf .
if the csf contain increased level of white blood cell and abnormal glucose and protein level , this indicate that the inflammation be a response to an infectioninflinin .

what be the two type of inflammation that can impact the cns ?

why do both form of inflammation have such serious consequence ?
guillain - barré syndrome guillain - barré syndrome ( gbs ) be a rare condition that can be precede by a viral or bacterial infection that result in an autoimmune reaction against myelinate nerve cell .
the destruction of the myelin sheath around these neuron result in a loss of sensation and function .
the first symptom of this condition be tingle and weakness in the affect tissue .
the symptom intensify over a period of several week and can culminate in complete paralysis .
severe case can be life - threaten .
infection by several different microbial pathogen , include campylobacter jejuni ( the most common risk factor ) , cytomegalovirus , epstein - barr virus , varicellazoster virus , mycoplasma pneumoniae , [ one ] and zika virus[ two ] have be identify as trigger for gbs .
anti - myelin antibody from patient with gbs have be demonstrate to also recognize c . jejuni .
- pron - be possible that crossreactive antibody , antibody that react with similar antigenic site on different protein , may be form during an infection and may lead to this autoimmune response .
gbs be solely identify by the appearance of clinical symptom .
there be no other diagnostic test available .
fortunately , most case spontaneously resolve within a few month with few permanent effect , as there be no available vaccine .
gbs can be treat by plasmapheresis .
in this procedure , the patient 's plasma be filter from - pron - blood , remove autoantibody .
micro connections one  one  seven  four chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  six  .  two bacterial diseases of the nervous system
learning objectives
 identify the most common bacteria that can cause infection of the nervous system  compare the major characteristic of specific bacterial disease affect the nervous system
bacterial infection that affect the nervous system be serious and can be life - threaten .
fortunately , there be only a few bacterial specie commonly associate with neurological infection .
bacterial meningitis bacterial meningitis be one of the most serious form of meningitis .
bacteria that cause meningitis often gain access to the cns through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxin .
bacteria may also spread from structure in the upper respiratory tract , such as the oropharynx , nasopharynx , sinus , and middle ear .
patient with head wound or cochlear implant ( an electronic device place in the inner ear ) be also at risk for develop meningitis .
many of the bacteria that can cause meningitis be commonly find in healthy people .
the most common cause of non - neonatal bacterial meningitis be neisseria meningitidis , streptococcus pneumoniae , and haemophilus influenzae .
all three of these bacterial pathogen be spread from person to person by respiratory secretion .
each can colonize and cross through the mucous membrane of the oropharynx and nasopharynx , and enter the blood .
once in the blood , these pathogen can disseminate throughout the body and be capable of both establish an infection and trigger inflammation in any body site , include the meninge ( figure two  six  .  five ) .
without appropriate systemic antibacterial therapy , the case - fatality rate can be as high as seven  zero % , and two  zero % of those survivor may be leave with irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction , result in hearing loss , neurologic disability , or loss of a limb .
mortality rate be much low ( as low as one  five % ) in population where appropriate therapeutic drug and preventive vaccine be available . [ three ] figure two  six  .  five
( a )
a normal human brain remove during an autopsy .
( b )
the brain of a patient who die from bacterial meningitis .
note the pus under the dura mater ( be retract by the forceps ) and the red hemorrhagic foci on the meninge .
( credit b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
a variety of other bacteria , include listeria monocytogene and escherichia coli , be also capable of cause one .
yuki , nobuhiro and hans - peter hartung , “ guillain – barré syndrome , " new england journal of medicine three  six  six , no .
two  four ( two  zero  one  two )  two  two  nine  four - three  zero  four . two .
cao - lormeau , van - mai , alexandre blake , sandrine mons , stéphane lastère , claudine roche , jessica vanhomwegen , timothée dub et al
.
, “ guillain - barré syndrome outbreak associated with zika virus infection in french polynesia 
a case - control study , " the lancet three  eight  seven , no . one  zero  zero  two  seven ( two  zero  one  six ) 
one  five  three  one - nine . three .
thigpen , michael c . , cynthia g . whitney , nancy e . messonnier , elizabeth r . zell , ruth lynfield , james l . hadler , lee h . harrison
et al .
, “ bacterial meningitis in the united states , one  nine  nine  eight – two  zero  zero  seven , " new england journal of medicine three  six  four , no .
two  one ( two  zero  one  one ) 
two  zero  one  six - two  five .
chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  seven  five meningitis .
these bacteria cause infection of the arachnoid mater and csf after spread through the circulation in blood or by spread from an infection of the sinus or nasopharynx .
streptococcus agalactiae , commonly find in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract , can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborn after transmission from the mother either before or during birth .
the profound inflammation cause by these microbe can result in early symptom that include severe headache , fever , confusion , nausea , vomiting , photophobia , and stiff neck .
systemic inflammatory response associate with some type of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesion on skin , follow by even more severe condition that include shock , convulsion , coma , and death - in some case , in the span of just a few hour .
diagnosis of bacterial meningitis be best confirm by analysis of csf obtain by a lumbar puncture .
abnormal level of polymorphonuclear neutrophil ( pmn )
( > one  zero pmn / mm three ) , glucose ( < four  five mg / dl ) , and protein ( > four  five mg / dl ) in the csf be suggestive of bacterial meningitis . [ four ]
characteristics of specific form of bacterial meningitis be detail in the subsection that follow .
meningococcal meningitis meningococcal meningitis be a serious infection cause by the gram - negative coccus n . meningitidis .
in some case , death can occur within a few hour of the onset of symptom .
nonfatal case can result in irreversible nerve damage , result in hear loss and brain damage , or amputation of extremity because of tissue necrosis .
meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age , but - pron - prevalence be high among infant , adolescent , and young adults . [ five ]
meningococcal meningitis be once the most common cause of meningitis epidemic in human population .
this be still the case in a swath of sub - saharan africa know as the meningitis belt , but meningococcal meningitis epidemic have become rare in most other region , thank to meningococcal vaccine .
however , outbreak can still occur in community , school , college , prison , and other population where people be in close direct contact .
n . meningitidis have a high affinity for mucosal membrane in the oropharynx and nasopharynx .
contact with respiratory secretion contain n . meningitidis be an effective mode of transmission .
the pathogenicity of n . meningitidis be enhance by virulence factor that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease .
these include lipooligosaccharide ( los ) endotoxin , type iv pili for attachment to host tissue , and polysaccharide capsule that help the cell avoid phagocytosis and complement - mediate killing .
additional virulence factor include iga protease ( which break down iga antibody ) , the invasion factor opa , opc , and porin ( which facilitate transcellular entry through the blood - brain barrier ) , iron - uptake factor ( which strip heme unit from hemoglobin in host cell and use - pron - for growth ) , and stress protein that protect bacteria from reactive oxygen molecule .
a unique sign of meningococcal meningitis be the formation of a petechial rash on the skin or mucous membrane , characterize by tiny , red , flat , hemorrhagic lesion .
this rash , which appear soon after disease onset , be a response to los endotoxin and adherence virulence factor that disrupt the endothelial cell of capillary and small vein in the skin .
the blood vessel disruption trigger the formation of tiny blood clot , cause blood to leak into the surround tissue .
as the infection progress , the level of virulence factor increase , and the hemorrhagic lesion can increase in size as blood continue to leak into tissue .
lesion large than one  .  zero cm usually occur in patient develop shock , as virulence factor cause increase hemorrhage and clot formation .
sepsis , as a result of systemic damage from meningococcal virulence factor , can lead to rapid multiple organ failure , shock , disseminate intravascular coagulation , and death .
because meningococcoal meningitis progress so rapidly , a great variety of clinical specimen be require for the timely detection of n . meningitidis .
require specimen can include blood , csf , naso - and oropharyngeal swab , urethral and endocervical swab , petechial aspirate , and biopsy .
safety protocol for handling and transport of specimen suspect of contain n . meningitidis should always be follow , since case of fatal meningococcal four .
popovic , t . , et al .
world health organization , “ laboratory manual for the diagnosis of meningitis cause by neisseria meningitidis , streptococcus pneumoniae , and haemophilus influenza , " one  nine  nine  nine .
five .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ meningococcal disease , " august five , two  zero  one  five .
accessed june two  eight , two  zero  one  five .
http / / www . cdc . gov / meningococcal / surveillance / index . html .
one  one  seven  six chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five disease have occur in healthcare worker expose to droplet or aerosol from patient specimen .
prompt presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when csf be directly evaluate by gram stain , reveal extra - and intracellular gram - negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee - bean microscopic morphology associate with pmn ( figure two  six  .  six ) .
identification can also be make directly from csf use latex agglutination and immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic test specific for n . meningitidis .
specie identification can also be perform use dna sequence - base typing scheme for hypervariable outer membrane protein of n . meningitidis , which have replace sero ( sub ) typing .
meningococcal infection can be treat with antibiotic therapy , and third - generation cephalosporin be most often employ .
however , because outcome can be negative even with treatment , preventive vaccination be the good form of treatment .
in two  zero  one  zero , country in africa 's meningitis belt begin use a new serogroup a meningococcal conjugate vaccine .
this program have dramatically reduce the number of case of meningococcal meningitis by confer individual and herd immunity .
twelve different capsular serotype of n . meningitidis be know to exist .
serotypes a , b , c , w , x , and y be the most prevalent worldwide .
the cdc recommend that child between one  one – one  two year of age be vaccinate with a single dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protect against serotype a , c , w , and y , with a booster at age one  six  . [ six ]
an additional booster or injection of serogroup b meningococcal vaccine may be give to individual in high - risk setting ( such as epidemic outbreak on college campus ) .
figure two  six  .  six n . meningitidis ( arrow ) associate with neutrophil ( the large stained cell ) in a gram - stain csf sample .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
meningitis on campus college student live in dorm or communal housing be at increase risk for contract epidemic meningitis .
from two  zero  one  one to two  zero  one  five , there have be at least nine meningococcal outbreak on college campus in the united states .
these incident involve a total of four  three student ( of whom four died ) . [ seven ]
in spite of rapid diagnosis and aggressive antimicrobial treatment , several of the survivor suffer from amputation or serious neurological problem .
prophylactic vaccination of first - year college student live in dorm be recommend by the cdc , and insurance company now cover meningococcal vaccination for student in college dorm .
some college have mandate vaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine for certain student enter college ( figure two  six  .  seven ) .
micro connections six .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ recommend immunization schedule for persons aged
zero
through one  eight year , united states , two  zero  one  six ,
" february one , two  zero  one  six .
access on june two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / vaccines / schedules / hcp / imz / child - adolescent . html .
seven .
national meningitis association , “ serogroup b meningococcal disease outbreaks on u . s . college campuses , " two  zero  one  six .
accessed june two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . nmaus . org / disease - prevention - information / serogroup - b - meningococcal - disease / outbreaks / . chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  seven  seven figure two  six  .  seven to prevent campus outbreak
, some college now require student to be vaccinate against meningogoccal meningitis .
( credit  modification of work by james gathany , centers for disease control and prevention )
pneumococcal meningitis
pneumococcal meningitis be cause by the encapsulate gram - positive bacterium s . pneumoniae ( pneumococcus , also call strep pneumo ) .
this organism be commonly find in the microbiota of the pharynx of three  zero – seven  zero % of young child , depend on the sampling method , while s . pneumoniae can be find in few than five % of healthy adult .
although - pron - be often present without disease symptom , this microbe can cross the blood - brain barrier in susceptible individual .
in some case , - pron - may also result in septicemia .
since the introduction of the hib vaccine , s . pneumoniae have become the lead cause of meningitis in human age two month through adulthood .
s . pneumoniae can be identify in csf sample use gram - stain specimen , latex agglutination , and immunochromatographic rdt specific for s . pneumoniae .
in gram - stain sample , s . pneumoniae appear as grampositive , lancet - shape diplococci ( figure two  six  .  eight ) .
identification of s . pneumoniae can also be achieve use culture of csf and blood , and at least nine  three distinct serotype can be identify base on the quellung reaction to unique capsular polysaccharide .
pcr and rt - pcr assay be also available to confirm identification .
major virulence factor produce by s . pneumoniae include pi -  one pilin for adherence to host cell ( pneumococcal adherence ) and virulence factor b ( pavb ) for attachment to cell of the respiratory tract  choline - bind protein ( cbpa ) that bind to epithelial cell and interfere with immune factor iga and c three  and the cytoplasmic bacterial toxin pneumolysin that trigger an inflammatory response .
with the emergence of drug - resistant strain of s . pneumoniae , pneumococcal meningitis be typically treat with broad - spectrum antibiotic , such as levofloxacin , cefotaxime , penicillin , or other β - lactam antibiotic .
the two available pneumococcal vaccine be describe in bacterial infections of the respiratory tract .
one  one  seven  eight chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  eight
( a )
digitally colorized fluorescent antibody stain micrograph of streptococcus pneumoniae in csf .
( b ) s . pneumoniae grow on blood agar .
( credit a  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by nathan reading )
haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis due to h . influenzae serotype b ( hib ) , an encapsulate pleomorphic gram - negative coccobacilli , be now uncommon in most country , because of the use of the effective hib vaccine .
without the use of the hib vaccine , h . influenzae can be the primary cause of meningitis in child two month thru five year of age .
h . influenzae can be find in the throat of healthy individual , include infant and young child .
by five year of age , most child have develop immunity to this microbe .
infant old than two month of age , however , do not produce a sufficient protective antibody response and be susceptible to serious disease .
the intracranial pressure cause by this infection lead to a five % mortality rate and two  zero % incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors . [ eight ] h . influenzae produce at least one  six different virulence factor , include los , which trigger inflammation , and haemophilus adhesion and penetration factor ( hap ) , which aid in attachment and invasion into respiratory epithelial cell .
the bacterium also have a polysaccharide capsule that help - pron - avoid phagocytosis , as well as factor such as iga one protease and p two protein that allow - pron - to evade antibody secrete from mucous membrane .
in addition , factor such as hemoglobin - bind protein ( hgp ) and transferrin - bind protein ( tbp ) acquire iron from hemoglobin and transferrin , respectively , for bacterial growth .
preliminary diagnosis of h . influenzae infection can be make by direct pcr and a smear of csf .
stain smear will reveal intracellular and extracellular pmn with small , pleomorphic , gram - negative coccobacilli or filamentous form that be characteristic of h . influenzae .
initial confirmation of this genus can be base on - pron - fastidious growth on chocolate agar .
identification be confirm with requirement for exogenous biochemical growth cofactor nad and heme ( by maldi - tof ) , latex agglutination , and rt - pcr .
meningitis cause by h . influenzae be usually treat with doxycycline , fluoroquinolone , second - and thirdgeneration cephalosporin , and carbapenem .
the good mean of prevent h . influenza infection be with the use of the hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine .
- pron - be recommend that all child receive this vaccine at two , four , and six month of age , with a final booster dose at one  two to one  five month of age . [ nine ] eight .
united states department of health and human services , “ hib ( haemophilus influenzae type b ) , " accessed june two  eight , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . vaccines . gov / disease / hib / # . nine .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ meningococcal disease , disease trends , " two  zero  one  five .
accessed september one  three , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / meningococcal / surveillance / index . html .
chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  seven  nine neonatal meningitis s . agalactiae , group b streptococcus ( gbs ) , be an encapsulated gram - positive bacterium that be the most common cause of neonatal meningitis , a term that refer to meningitis occur in baby up to three month of age . [ one  zero ] s . agalactiae can also cause meningitis in people of all age and can be find in the urogenital and gastrointestinal microbiota of about one  zero – three  zero % of human .
neonatal infection occur as either early onset or late - onset disease .
early onset disease be define as occur in infant up to seven day old .
the infant initially become infect by s . agalactiae during childbirth , when the bacteria may be transfer from the mother 's vagina .
incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduce by give intravenous antibiotic to the mother during labor .
late - onset neonatal meningitis occur in infant between one week and three month of age .
infant bear to mother with s . agalactiae in the urogenital tract have a high risk of late - onset menigitis , but late - onset infection can be transmit from source other than the mother  often , the source of infection be unknown .
infant who be bear prematurely ( before three  seven week of pregnancy ) or to mother who develop a fever also have a great risk of contract late - onset neonatal meningitis .
sign and symptom of early onset disease include temperature instability , apnea ( cessation of breathing ) , bradycardia ( slow heart rate ) , hypotension , difficulty feeding , irritability , and limpness .
when asleep , the baby may be difficult to wake up .
symptom of late - onset disease be more likely to include seizure , bulging fontanel ( soft spot ) , stiff neck , hemiparesis ( weakness on one side of the body ) , and opisthotono ( rigid body with arched back and head throw backward ) .
s . agalactiae produce at least one  two virulence factor that include fbsa
that attach to host cell surface protein , pi -  one pili that promote the invasion of human endothelial cell , a polysaccharide capsule that prevent the activation of the alternative complement pathway and inhibit phagocytosis , and the toxin camp factor , which form pore in host cell membrane and bind to igg and igm antibody .
diagnosis of neonatal meningitis be often , but not uniformly , confirm by positive result from culture of csf or blood .
test include routine culture , antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay , serotyping of different capsule type , pcr , and rt - pcr .
- pron - be typically treat with β - lactam antibiotic such as intravenous penicillin or ampicillin plus gentamicin .
even with treatment , roughly one  zero % mortality be see in infect neonates . [ one  one ]

which group be most vulnerable to each of the bacterial meningitis disease ?

for which of the bacterial meningitis disease be there vaccine presently available ?

which organism can cause epidemic meningitis ?
clostridium - associated diseases species in the genus
clostridium be gram - positive , endospore - form rod that be obligate anaerobe .
endospore of clostridium spp .
be widespread in nature , commonly find in soil , water , fece , sewage , and marine sediment .
clostridium spp . produce more type of protein
exotoxin than any other bacterial genus , include two exotoxin with protease activity that be the most potent know biological toxin  botulinum neurotoxin ( bont )
and tetanus one  zero .
thigpen , michael c . , cynthia g . whitney , nancy e . messonnier , elizabeth r . zell , ruth lynfield , james l . hadler , lee h . harrison
et al .
, “ bacterial meningitis in the united states , one  nine  nine  eight – two  zero  zero  seven , " new england journal of medicine three  six  four , no .
two  one ( two  zero  one  one ) 
two  zero  one  six
- two  five . one  one .
thigpen , michael c . , cynthia g . whitney , nancy e . messonnier , elizabeth r . zell , ruth lynfield , james l . hadler , lee h . harrison
et al .
, “ bacterial meningitis in the united states , one  nine  nine  eight – two  zero  zero  seven , " new england journal of medicine three  six  four , no .
two  one ( two  zero  one  one )  two  zero  one  six - two  five  heath , paul t . , gail balfour , abbie m . weisner , androulla efstratiou , theresa l . lamagni , helen tighe , liam af o'connell et al . , “ group b streptococcal disease in uk and irish infants young than nine  zero day , " the lancet three  six  three ,
no .
nine  four  zero  five ( two  zero  zero  four ) 
two  nine  two - four . one  one  eight  zero chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five neurotoxin ( tent ) .
these two toxin have lethal dos of zero  .  two – one  zero ng per kg body weight .
bont can be produce by unique strain of c . butyricum , and c . baratii  however , - pron - be primarily associate with c . botulinum and the condition of botulism .
tent , which cause tetanus , be only produce by c . tetani .
these powerful neural exotoxin be the primary virulence factor for these pathogen .
the mode of action for these toxin be describe in virulence factors of bacterial and viral pathogens and illustrate in figure one  five  .  one  six .
diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involve bioassay that detect the presence of bont and tent in fecal specimen , blood ( serum ) , or suspect food .
in addition , both c . botulinum and c . tetani can be isolate and culture use commercially available medium for anaerobe .
elisa and rt - pcr test be also available .
tetanus tetanus be a noncommunicable disease characterize by uncontrollable muscle spasm ( contraction ) cause by the action of tent .
- pron - generally occur when c . tetani infect a wound and produce tent , which rapidly bind to neural tissue , result in an intoxication ( poisoning ) of neuron .
depend on the site and extent of infection , case of tetanus can be describe as localized , cephalic , or generalize .
generalize tetanus that occur in a newborn be call neonatal tetanus .
localized tetanus occur when tent only affect the muscle group close to the injury site .
there be no cns involvement , and the symptom be usually mild , with localized muscle spasm cause by a dysfunction in the surround neuron .
individual with partial immunity - especially previously vaccinate individual who neglect to get the recommend booster shot - be most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of c . tetani infect a puncture wound .
cephalic tetanus be a rare , localized form of tetanus generally associate with wound on the head or face .
in rare case , - pron - have occur in case of otitis medium ( middle ear infection ) .
cephalic tetanus often result in patient see double image , because of the spasm affect the muscle that control eye movement .
both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalize tetanus - a much more serious condition - if tent be able to spread further into body tissue .
in generalize tetanus , tent enter neuron of the pns .
from there , tent travel from the site of the wound , usually on an extremity of the body , retrograde ( back up ) to inhibitory neuron in the cns .
there , - pron - prevent the release of gamma aminobutyric acid ( gaba ) , the neurotransmitter responsible for muscle relaxation .
the result muscle spasm often first occur in the jaw muscle , lead to the characteristic symptom of lockjaw ( inability to open the mouth ) .
as the toxin progressively continue to block neurotransmitter release , other muscle become involved , result in uncontrollable , sudden muscle spasm that be powerful enough to cause tendon to rupture and bone to fracture .
spasm in the muscle in the neck , back , and leg may cause the body to form a rigid , stiff arch , a posture call opisthotono ( figure two  six  .  nine ) .
spasm in the larynx , diaphragm , and muscle of the chest restrict the patient 's ability to swallow and breathe , eventually lead to death by asphyxiation ( insufficient supply of oxygen ) .
neonatal tetanus typically occur when the stump of the umbilical cord be contaminate with spore of c . tetani after delivery .
although this condition be rare in the united states , neonatal tetanus be a major cause of infant mortality in country that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occur in unsanitary condition .
at the end of the first week of life , infected infant become irritable , feed poorly , and develop rigidity with spasm .
neonatal tetanus have a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of seven  zero %– one  zero  zero % . [ one  two ] treatment for patient with tetanus include assist breathing through the use of a ventilator , wound debridement , fluid balance , and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of c . tetani .
in addition , patient be treat with tent antitoxin , preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixed toxin and benzodiazepine to enhance the effect of gaba for muscle relaxation and anxiety .
a tetanus toxoid ( tt ) vaccine be available for protection and prevention of tetanus .
- pron - be the t component of vaccine such as dtap , tdap , and td .
the cdc recommend child receive dos of the dtap vaccine at two , four , six , and one  five – one  eight one  two .
unfpa ,
unicef who , “ maternal and neonatal tetanus elimination by two  zero  zero  five , " two  zero  zero  zero .
http / / www . unicef . org / immunization / files /
mnte_strategy_paper . pdf .
chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  eight  one month of age and another at four – six year of age .
one dose of td be recommend for adolescent and adult as a tt booster
every one  zero years . [ one  three ] figure two  six  .  nine
a tetanus patient exhibit the rigid body posture know as opisthotono .
( credit  center for disease control and prevention )
botulism botulism be a rare but frequently fatal illness cause by intoxication by bont .
- pron - can occur either as the result of an infection by c . botulinum , in which case the bacteria produce bont in vivo , or as the result of a direct introduction of bont into tissue .
infection and production of bont in vivo can result in wound botulism , infant botulism , and adult intestinal toxemia .
wound botulism typically occur when c . botulinum be introduce directly into a wound after a traumatic injury , deep puncture wound , or injection site .
infant botulism , which occur in infant young than one year of age , and adult intestinal toxemia , which occur in immunocompromised adult , result from ingest c . botulinum endospore in food .
the endospore germinate in the body , result in the production of bont in the intestinal tract .
intoxication occur when bont be produce outside the body and then introduce directly into the body through food ( foodborne botulism ) , air ( inhalation botulism ) , or a clinical procedure ( iatrogenic botulism ) .
foodborne botulism , the most common of these form , occur when bont be produce in contaminate food and then ingest along with the food ( recall case in point 
a streak of bad potluck ) .
inhalation botulism be rare because bont be unstable as an aerosol and do not occur in nature  however , - pron - can be produce in the laboratory and be use ( unsuccessfully ) as a bioweapon by terrorist in japan in the one  nine  nine  zero .
a few case of accidental inhalation botulism have also occur .
iatrogenic botulism be also rare  - pron - be associate with injection of bont use for cosmetic purpose ( see micro connections 
medicinal use of botulinum toxin ) .
when bont enter the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal tract , wound , or lung , - pron - be transfer to the neuromuscular junction of motor neuron where - pron - bind irreversibly to presynaptic membrane and prevent the release of acetylcholine from the presynaptic terminal of motor neuron into the neuromuscular junction .
the consequence of prevent acetylcholine release be the loss of muscle activity , lead to muscle relaxation and eventually paralysis .
if bont be absorb through the gastrointestinal tract , early symptom of botulism include blur vision , droop eyelid , difficulty swallowing , abdominal cramp , nausea , vomiting , constipation , or possibly diarrhea .
this be follow by progressive flaccid paralysis , a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscle .
a patient 's experience can be particularly terrify , because hearing remain normal , consciousness be not lose , and - pron - or - pron - be one  three .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ tetanus vaccination , " two  zero  one  three .
access june two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / tetanus / vaccination . html .
one  one  eight  two chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five fully aware of the progression of - pron - or - pron - condition .
in infant , notable sign of botulism include weak cry , decrease ability to suckle , and hypotonia ( limpness of head or body ) .
eventually , botulism end in death from respiratory failure cause by the progressive paralysis of the muscle of the upper airway , diaphragm , and chest .
botulism be treat with an antitoxin specific for bont .
if administer in time , the antitoxin stop the progression of paralysis but do not reverse - pron - .
once the antitoxin have be administer , the patient will slowly regain neurological function , but this may take several week or month , depend on the severity of the case .
during recovery , patient generally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator .

how frequently should the tetanus vaccination be update in adult ?

what be the most common cause of botulism ?

why be botulism not treat with an antibiotic ?
medicinal use of botulinum toxin
although - pron - be the most toxic biological material know to man , botulinum toxin be often intentionally inject into people to treat other condition .
type a botulinum toxin be use cosmetically to reduce wrinkle .
the injection of minute quantity of this toxin into the face cause the relaxation of facial muscle , thereby give the skin a smooth appearance .
eyelid twitch and cross eye can also be treat with botulinum toxin injection .
other use of this toxin include the treatment of hyperhidrosis ( excessive sweating ) .
in fact , botulinum toxin can be use to moderate the effect of several other apparently nonmicrobial disease involve inappropriate nerve function .
such disease include cerebral palsy , multiple sclerosis , and parkinson 's disease .
each of these disease be characterize by a loss of control over muscle contraction  treatment with botulinum toxin serve to relax contract muscle .
listeriosis listeria monocytogene be a nonencapsulated , nonsporulate , gram - positive rod and a foodborne pathogen that cause listeriosis .
at - risk group include pregnant woman , neonate , the elderly , and the immunocompromised ( recall the clinical focus case study in microbial growth and microbial mechanisms of pathogenicity ) .
listeriosis lead to meningitis in about two  zero % of case , particularly neonate and patient over the age of six  zero .
the cdc identifie listeriosis as the third lead cause of death due to foodborne illness , with overall mortality rate reach one  six % . [ one  four ]
in pregnant woman , listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant woman because of the pathogen 's unique ability to cross the placenta .
l . monocytogene be generally introduce into food item by contamination with soil or animal manure use as fertilizer .
food commonly associate with listeriosis include fresh fruit and vegetable , frozen vegetable , process meat , soft cheese , and raw milk . [ one  five ]
unlike most other foodborne pathogen , listeria be able to grow at temperature between zero ° c and five  zero ° c , and can therefore continue to grow , even in refrigerated food .
micro connections one  four .
scallan , elaine , robert m . hoekstra , frederick j . angulo , robert v . tauxe , marc - alain widdowson , sharon l . roy , jeffery l . jones , and patricia m . griffin ,
“ foodborne illness acquire in the united states - major pathogens , " emerge infectious diseases one  seven ,
no .
one ( two  zero  one  one ) 
seven - one  five . one  five .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ listeria outbreaks , " two  zero  one  six .
access june two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
https / / www . cdc . gov / listeria / outbreak / index . html .
chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  eight  three ingestion of contaminate food lead initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract .
however , l . monocytogene produce several unique virulence factor that allow - pron - to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other body system .
surface protein call internalin ( inla and inlb ) help l . monocytogene invade nonphagocytic cell and tissue , penetrate the intestinal wall and become disseminate through the circulatory and lymphatic system .
internalin also enable l . monocytogene to breach other important barrier , include the blood - brain barrier and the placenta .
within tissue , l . monocytogene use other protein call listeriolysin o and acta to facilitate intercellular movement , allow the infection to spread from cell to cell ( figure two  six  .  one  zero ) .
l . monocytogene be usually identify by cultivation of sample from a normally sterile site ( e . g . , blood or csf ) .
recovery of viable organism can be enhance use cold enrichment by incubate sample in a broth at four ° c for a week or more .
distinguish type and subtype of l . monocytogene - an important step for diagnosis and epidemiology - be typically do use pulse - field gel electrophoresis .
identification can also be achieve use chemiluminescence dna probe assay and maldi - tof .
treatment for listeriosis involve antibiotic therapy , most commonly with ampicillin and gentamicin .
there be no vaccine available .
figure two  six  .  one  zero ( a )
an electron micrograph of listeria monocytogene infect a host cell .
( b ) listeria be able to use host cell component to cause infection .
for example , phagocytosis allow - pron - to enter host cell , and the host 's cytoskeleton provide the material to help the pathogen move to other cell .
( credit a  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention  credit b  modification of work by keith ireton )

how do listeria enter the nervous system ?
hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) hansen 's disease ( also know as leprosy ) be cause by a long , thin , filamentous rod - shape bacterium mycobacterium leprae , an obligate intracellular pathogen .
m . leprae be classify as gram - positive bacteria , but - pron - be best visualize microscopically with an acid - fast stain and be generally refer to as an acid - fast bacterium .
hansen 's disease affect the pns , lead to permanent damage and loss of appendage or other body part .
one  one  eight  four chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five hansen 's disease be communicable but not highly contagious  approximately nine  five % of the human population can not be easily infect because - pron - have a natural immunity to m . leprae .
person - to - person transmission occur by inhalation into nasal mucosa or prolong and repeat contact with infected skin .
armadillos , one of only five mammal susceptible to hansen 's disease , have also be implicate in transmission of some cases . [ one  six ]
in the human body , m . leprae grow good at the cooler temperature find in peripheral tissue like the nose , toe , finger , and ear .
some of the virulence factor that contribute to m . leprae 's pathogenicity be locate on the capsule and cell wall of the bacterium .
these virulence factor enable - pron - to bind to and invade schwann cell , result in progressive demyelination that gradually destroy neuron of the pns .
the loss of neuronal function lead to hypoesthesia ( numbness ) in infected lesion .
m . leprae be readily phagocytize by macrophage but be able to survive within macrophage in part by neutralize reactive oxygen specie produce in the oxidative burst of the phagolysosome .
like l . monocytogene , m . leprae also can move directly between macrophage to avoid clearance by immune factor .
the extent of the disease be relate to the immune response of the patient .
initial symptom may not appear for as long as two to five year after infection .
these often begin with small , blanched , numb area of the skin .
in most individual , these will resolve spontaneously , but some case may progress to a more serious form of the disease .
tuberculoid ( paucibacillary )
hansen 's disease be mark by the presence of relatively few ( three or less ) flat , blanched skin lesion with small nodule at the edge and few bacteria present in the lesion .
although these lesion can persist for year or decade , the bacteria be hold in check by an effective immune response include cell - mediate cytotoxicity .
individual who be unable to contain the infection may later develop lepromatous ( multibacillary ) hansen 's disease .
this be a progressive form of the disease characterize by nodule fill with acid - fast bacilli and macrophage .
impaired function of infected schwann cell lead to peripheral nerve damage , result in sensory loss that lead to ulcer , deformity , and fracture .
damage to the ulnar nerve ( in the wrist ) by m . leprae be one of the most common cause of crippling of the hand .
in some case , chronic tissue damage can ultimately lead to loss of finger or toe .
when mucosal tissue be also involve , disfigure lesion of the nose and face can also occur ( figure two  six  .  one  one ) .
hansen 's disease be diagnose on the basis of clinical sign and symptom of the disease , and confirm by the presence of acid - fast bacilli on skin smear or in skin biopsy specimen ( figure two  six  .  one  one ) .
m . leprae do not grow in vitro on any know laboratory medium , but - pron - can be identify by culture in vivo in the footpad of laboratory mouse or armadillo .
where need , pcr and genotyping of m . leprae dna in infect human tissue may be perform for diagnosis and epidemiology .
hansen 's disease respond well to treatment and , if diagnose and treat early , do not cause disability .
in the united states , most patient with hansen 's disease be treat in ambulatory care clinic in major city by the national hansen 's disease program , the only institution in the united states exclusively devoted to hansen 's disease .
since one  nine  nine  five , who have make multidrug therapy for hansen 's disease available free of charge to all patient worldwide .
as a result , global prevalence of hansen 's disease have decline from about five  .  two million case in one  nine  eight  five to roughly one  seven  six  ,  zero  zero  zero in two  zero  one  four  . [ one  seven ]
multidrug therapy consist of dapsone and rifampicin for all patient and a third drug , clofazimin , for patient with multibacillary disease .
currently , there be no universally accept vaccine for hansen 's disease .
india and brazil use a tuberculosis vaccine against hansen 's disease because both disease be cause by specie of mycobacterium .
the effectiveness of this method be questionable , however , since - pron - appear that the vaccine work in some population but not in other .
one  six .
sharma , rahul , pushpendra singh , w . j . loughry , j . mitchell lockhart , w . barry inman , malcolm s . duthie ,
maria t . pena et al . ,
“ zoonotic leprosy in the southeastern united states , " emerge infectious diseases two  one ,
no .
one  two ( two  zero  one  five ) 
two  one  two  seven
- three  four . one  seven .
world health organization , “ leprosy fact sheet , " two  zero  one  six .
accessed september one  three , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . who . int / mediacentre / factsheets / fs one  zero  one  / en / . chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  eight  five figure two  six  .  one  one ( a )
the nose of a patient with hansen 's disease .
note the lepromatous / multibacillary lesion around the nostril .
( b ) hansen 's disease be cause by mycobacterium leprae , a gram - positive bacillus .
( credit a , b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )

what prevent the progression from tuberculoid to lepromatus leprosy ?

why do hansen 's disease typically affect the nerve of the extremity ?
leper colonies disfiguring , deadly disease like leprosy have historically be stigmatize in many culture .
before leprosy be understand , victim be often isolate in leper colony , a practice mention frequently in ancient text , include the bible .
but leper colony be not just an artifact of the ancient world .
in hawaii , a leper colony establish in the late nineteenth century persist until the mid - twentieth century , - pron - resident force to live in deplorable conditions . [ one  eight ]
although leprosy be a communicable disease , - pron - be not consider contagious ( easily communicable ) , and - pron - certainly do not pose enough of a threat to justify the permanent isolation of - pron - victim .
today , - pron - reserve the practice of isolation and quarantine to patient with more dangerous disease , such as ebola or multiple - drug - resistant bacteria like mycobacterium tuberculosis and staphylococcus aureus .
the ethical argument for this practice be that isolate infect patient be necessary to prevent the transmission and spread of highly contagious disease - even when - pron - go against the wish of the patient .
of course , - pron - be much easy to justify the practice of temporary , clinical quarantining than permanent social segregation , as occur in leper colony .
in the one  nine  eight  zero , there be call by some group to establish camp for people infect with aids .
although this idea be never actually implement , - pron - beg the question - where do - pron - draw the line ?
be permanent isolation camp or colony ever medically or socially justifiable ?
suppose there be an outbreak of a fatal , contagious disease for which there be no treatment .
would - pron - be justifiable to impose social isolation on those afflict with the disease ?
how would - pron - balance the right of the infect with the risk - pron - pose to other ?
to what extent should society expect individual to put - pron - own health at risk for the sake of treat other humanely ?
eye on
ethics one  one  eight  six chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five bacterial infections of the nervous system despite the formidable defense protect the nervous system , a number of bacterial pathogen be know to cause serious infection of the cns or pns .
unfortunately , these infection be often serious and life threaten .
figure two  six  .  one  two summarize some important infection of the nervous system .
disease profile one  eight .
national park service , “ a brief history of kalaupapa , " accessed february two , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . nps . gov / kala / learn / historyculture / abrief - history - of - kalaupapa . htm .
chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  eight  seven figure two  six  .  one  two
one  one  eight  eight chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five two  six  .  three acellular diseases of the nervous system
learning objectives
 identify the most common acellular pathogen that can cause infection of the nervous system  compare the major characteristic of specific viral disease affect the nervous system
a number of different virus and subviral particle can cause disease that affect the nervous system .
viral disease tend to be more common than bacterial infection of the nervous system today .
fortunately , viral infection be generally mild than - pron - bacterial counterpart and often spontaneously resolve .
some of the more important acellular pathogen of the nervous system be describe in this section .
viral meningitis
although - pron - be much more common than bacterial meningitis , viral meningitis be typically less severe .
many different virus can lead to meningitis as a sequela of the primary infection , include those that cause herpe , influenza , measle , and mump .
most case of viral meningitis spontaneously resolve , but severe case do occur .
arboviral encephalitis several type of insect - bear virus can cause encephalitis .
collectively , these virus be refer to as arbovirus ( because - pron - be arthropod - borne ) , and the disease - pron - cause be describe as arboviral encephalitis .
most arbovirus be endemic to specific geographical region .
arborviral encephalitis disease find in the united states include eastern equine encephalitis ( eee ) , western equine encephalitis ( wee ) , st . louis encephalitis , and west nile encephalitis ( wne ) .
expansion of arbovirus beyond - pron - endemic region sometimes occur , generally as a result of environmental change that be favorable to the virus or - pron - vector .
increase travel of infected human , animal , or vector have also allow arbovirus to spread into new region .
in most case , arboviral infection be asymptomatic or lead to a mild disease .
however , when symptom do occur , - pron - include high fever , chill , headache , vomiting , diarrhea , and restlessness .
in elderly patient , severe arboviral encephalitis can rapidly lead to convulsion , coma , and death .
mosquito be the most common biological vector for arbovirus , which tend to be envelop ssrna virus .
thus , prevention of arboviral infection be best achieve by avoid mosquito - use insect repellent , wear long pant and sleeve , sleep in well - screen room , use bed net , etc .
diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis be base on clinical symptom and serologic testing of serum or csf .
there be no antiviral drug to treat any of these arboviral disease , so treatment consist of supportive care and management of symptom .
eastern equine encephalitis ( eee ) be cause by eastern equine encephalitis virus ( eeev ) , which can cause severe disease in horse and human .
bird be reservoir for eeev with accidental transmission to horse and human by aedes , coquillettidia , and culex specie of mosquito .
neither horse nor human serve as reservoir .
eee be most common in us gulf coast and atlantic state .
eee be one of the more severe mosquito - transmit disease in the united states , but fortunately , - pron - be a very rare disease in the united states ( figure two  six  .  one  three  ) . [ one  nine ][ two  zero ] western equine encephalitis ( wee ) be cause by western equine encephalitis virus ( weev ) .
weev be usually transmit to horse and human by the culex tarsalis mosquito and , in the past decade , have cause very few case of encephalitis in human in the united states .
in human , wee symptom be less severe than eee and include one  nine .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ eastern equine encephalitis virus disease cases and deaths report to cdc by year and clinical presentation , two  zero  zero  four – two  zero  one  three , " two  zero  one  four .
http / / www . cdc . gov / easternequineencephalitis / resource / eeev - cases -
by - year_ two  zero  zero  four - two  zero  one  three  . pdf .
two  zero .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ eastern equine encephalitis , symptoms and treatment , two  zero  one  six ,
" accessed june two  nine , two  zero  one  six .
https / / www . cdc . gov / easternequineencephalitis / tech / symptoms . html .
chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  eight  nine fever , chill , and vomiting , with a mortality rate of three – four % .
like eeev , bird be the natural reservoir for weev .
periodically , for indeterminate reason , epidemic in human case have occur in north america in the past .
the large on record be in one  nine  four  one , with more than three  four  zero  zero cases . [ two  one ] figure two  six  .  one  three ( a )
a false color tem of a mosquito salivary gland cell show an infection of the eastern equine encephalitis virus ( red ) .
( b ) ct ( leave ) and mri ( right ) scan of the brain of child with eastern equine encephalitis infection , show abnormality ( arrow ) result from the infection .
( credit a , b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
st . louis encephalitis ( sle ) , cause by st . louis encephalitis virus ( slev ) , be a rare form of encephalitis with symptom occur in few than one % of infected patient .
the natural reservoir for slev be bird .
slev be most often find in the ohio - mississippi river basin of the central united states and be name after a severe outbreak in missouri in one  nine  three  four .
the bad outbreak of st . louis encephalitis occur in one  nine  seven  five , with over two  zero  zero  zero case reported . [ two  two ]
humans become infect when bite by c . tarsalis , c . quinquefasciatus , or c . pipien mosquito carry slev .
most patient be asymptomatic , but in a small number of individual , symptom range from mild flu - like syndrome to fatal encephalitis .
the overall mortality rate for symptomatic patient be five – one  five % . [ two  three ] japanese encephalitis , cause by japanese encephalitis virus ( jev ) , be the lead cause of vaccine - preventable encephalitis in human and be endemic to some of the most populous country in the world , include china , india , japan , and all of southeast asia .
jev be transmit to human by culex mosquito , usually the specie c . tritaeniorhynchus .
the biological reservoir for jev include pig and wad bird .
most patient with jev infection be asymptomatic , with symptom occur in few than one % of infected individual .
however , about two  five % of those who do develop encephalitis die , and among those who recover , three  zero – five  zero % have psychiatric , neurologic , or cognitive impairment . [ two  four ]
fortunately , there be an effective vaccine that can prevent infection with jev .
the cdc recommend this vaccine for traveler who expect to spend more than one month in endemic area .
as the name suggest , west nile virus ( wnv ) and - pron - associate disease , west nile encephalitis ( wne ) , do not originate in north america .
until one  nine  nine  nine , - pron - be endemic in the middle east , africa , and asia  however , the first us two  one .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ western equine encephalitis - united states and canada , one  nine  eight  seven , " morbidity and mortality weekly report three  six , no . three  nine
( one  nine  eight  seven )  six  five  five . two  two .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ saint louis encephalitis , epidemiology and geographic distribution , " access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / sle / technical / epi . html .
two  three .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ saint louis encephalitis , symptoms and treatment , " accessed june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / sle / technical / symptoms . html .
two  four .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ japanese encephalitis , symptoms and treatment , " accessed june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / japaneseencephalitis / symptoms / index . html .
one  one  nine  zero chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five case be identify in new york in one  nine  nine  nine , and by two  zero  zero  four , the virus have spread across the entire continental united states .
over three  five  ,  zero  zero  zero case , include one  four  zero  zero death , be confirm in the five - year period between one  nine  nine  nine and two  zero  zero  four .
wnv infection remain reportable to the cdc .
wnv be transmit to human by culex mosquito from - pron - natural reservoir , infect bird , with seven  zero – eight  zero % of infected patient experience no symptom .
most symptomatic case involve only mild , flu - like symptom , but few than one % of infected people develop severe and sometimes fatal encephalitis or meningitis .
the mortality rate in wnv patient who develop neurological disease be about one  zero % .
more information about west nile virus can be find in modes of disease transmission .
this interactive map ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two arboviralus ) identify case of several arboviral disease in human and reservoir specie by state and year for the united states .

why be - pron - unlikely that arboviral encephalitis virus will be eradicate in the future ?

which be the most common form of viral encephalitis in the united states ?
part two
levofloxacin be a quinolone antibiotic that be often prescribe to treat bacterial infection of the respiratory tract , include pneumonia and bronchitis .
but after take the medication for a week , david return to - pron - physician sicker than before .
- pron - claim that the antibiotic have no effect on - pron - early symptom .
in addition , - pron - now be experience headache , a stiff neck , and difficulty focus at work .
- pron - also show the doctor a rash that have develop on - pron - arm over the past week .
- pron - doctor , more concerned now , begin to ask about david ' s activity over the past two week .
david explain that - pron - have be recently work on a project to disassemble an old barn .
- pron - doctor collect sputum sample and scraping from david 's rash for culture .
a spinal tap be also perform to examine david 's csf .
microscopic examination of - pron - csf reveal encapsulate yeast cell .
base on this result , the doctor prescribe a new antimicrobial therapy use amphotericin b and flucytosine .
 why be the original treatment ineffective ?

why be the presence of a capsule clinically important ?
jump to the previous clinical focus box .
jump to the next clinical focus box .
zika virus infection zika virus infection be an emerge arboviral disease associate with human illness in africa , southeast asia , and south and central america  however , - pron - range be expand as a result of the widespread range of - pron - mosquito vector .
the first case originate in the united states be report in two  zero  one  six  . the zika virus be initially describe link to learn clinical focus chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  nine  one in one  nine  four  seven from monkey in the zika forest of uganda through a network that monitor yellow fever .
- pron - be not consider a serious human pathogen until the first large - scale outbreak occur in micronesia in two  zero  zero  seven  [ two  five ]
however , the virus have gain notoriety over the past decade , as - pron - have emerge as a cause of symptom similar to other arboviral infection that include fever , skin rash , conjunctivitis , muscle and joint pain , malaise , and headache .
mosquito of the aedes genus be the primary vector , although the virus can also be transmit sexually , from mother to baby during pregnancy , or through a blood transfusion .
most zika virus infection result in mild symptom such as fever , a slight rash , or conjunctivitis .
however , infection in pregnant woman can adversely affect the develop fetus .
report in two  zero  one  five indicate fetal infection can result in brain damage , include a serious birth defect call microcephaly , in which the infant be bear with an abnormally small head ( figure two  six  .  one  four  ) . [ two  six ] diagnosis of zika be primarily base on clinical symptom .
however , the fda recently authorize the use of a zika virus rna assay , trioplex rt - pcr , and zika mac - elisa to test patient blood and urine to confirm zika virus disease .
there be currently no antiviral treatment or vaccine for zika virus , and treatment be limit to supportive care .
figure two  six  .  one  four ( a )
this colorize electron micrograph show zika virus particle ( red ) .
( b )
woman infect by the zika virus during pregnancy may give birth to child with microcephaly , a deformity characterize by an abnormally small head and brain .
( credit a , b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the sign and symptom of zika virus infection in adult ?

why be zika virus infection consider a serious public health threat ?
rabies rabies be a deadly zoonotic disease that have be know since antiquity .
the disease be cause by rabie virus ( rv ) , a member of the family rhabdoviridae , and be primarily transmit through the bite of an infected mammal .
rhabdoviridae be envelop rna virus that have a distinctive bullet shape ( figure two  six  .  one  five )  - pron - be first study two  five .
sikka , veronica , vijay kumar chattu , raaj k . popli , sagar c . galwankar , dhanashree kelkar , stanley g . sawicki , stanislaw p . stawicki , and thomas j . papadimos , “
the emergence of zika virus as a global health security threat  a review and a consensus statement of the indusem joint working group ( jwg ) , " journal of global infectious diseases eight ,
no .
one ( two  zero  one  six )
 three . two  six .
mlakar , jernej , misa korva , nataša tul , mara popović , mateja poljšak - prijatelj , jerica mraz ,
marko kolenc et al . ,
“ zika virus associate with microcephaly , " new england journal of medicine three  seven  four , no .
one  zero ( two  zero  one  six )  nine  five  one
- eight . one  one  nine  two chapter two  six

nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five by louis pasteur , who obtain rabie virus from rabid dog and cultivate the virus in rabbit .
- pron - successfully prepare a rabie vaccine use dry nerve tissue from infected animal .
this vaccine be use to first treat an infect human in one  eight  eight  five .
the most common reservoir in the united states be wild animal such as raccoon ( three  zero  .  two % of all animal case during two  zero  one  four ) , bat ( two  nine  .  one % ) , skunk ( two  six  .  three % ) , and fox ( four  .  one % )  collectively , these animal be responsible for a total of nine  two  .  six % of animal rabie case in the united states in two  zero  one  four .
the remain seven  .  four % of case that year be in domesticated animal such as dog , cat , horse , mule , sheep , goat , and llamas . [ two  seven ]
while there be typically only one or two human case per year in the united states , rabie still cause ten of thousand of human death per year worldwide , primarily in asia and africa .
the low incidence of rabie in the united states be primarily a result of the widespread vaccination of dog and cat .
an oral vaccine be also use to protect wild animal , such as raccoon and fox , from infection .
oral vaccine program tend to focus on geographic area where rabie be endemic . [ two  eight ]
the oral vaccine be usually deliver in a package of bait that be drop by airplane , although bait in urban area be do by hand to maximize safety . [ two  nine ]
many country require a quarantine or proof of rabie vaccination for domestic pet be bring into the country .
these procedure be especially strict in island nation where rabie be not yet present , such as australia .
the incubation period for rabie can be lengthy , range from several week or month to over a year .
as the virus replicate , - pron - move from the site of the bite into motor and sensory axon of peripheral nerve and spread from nerve to nerve use a process call retrograde transport , eventually make - pron - way to the cns through the spinal ganglia .
once rabie virus reach the brain , the infection lead to encephalitis cause by the disruption of normal neurotransmitter function , result in the symptom associate with rabie .
the virion act in the synaptic space as competitor with a variety of neurotransmitter for acetylcholine , gaba , and glycine receptor .
thus , the action of rabie virus be neurotoxic rather than cytotoxic .
after the rabie virus infect the brain , - pron - can continue to spread through other neuronal pathway , travel out of the cns to tissue such as the salivary gland , where the virus can be release .
as a result , as the disease progress the virus can be find in many other tissue , include the salivary gland , taste bud , nasal cavity , and tear .
the early symptom of rabie include discomfort at the site of the bite , fever , and headache .
once the virus reach the brain and later symptom appear , the disease be always fatal .
terminal rabie case can end in one of two way  either furious or paralytic rabie .
individual with furious rabie become very agitated and hyperactive .
hydrophobia ( a fear of water ) be common in patient with furious rabie , which be cause by muscular spasm in the throat when swallow or think about water .
excess salivation and a desire to bite can lead to foam of the mouth .
these behavior serve to enhance the likelihood of viral transmission , although contact with infected secretion like saliva or tear alone be sufficient for infection .
the disease culminate after just a few day with terror and confusion , follow by cardiovascular and respiratory arrest .
in contrast , individual with paralytic rabie generally follow a long course of disease .
the muscle at the site of infection become paralyzed .
over a period of time , the paralysis slowly spread throughout the body .
this paralytic form of disease culminate in coma and death .
before present - day diagnostic method be available , rabie diagnosis be make use a clinical case history and histopathological examination of biopsy or autopsy tissue , look for the presence of negri body .
- pron - now know these histologic change can not be use to confirm a rabie diagnosis .
there be no test that can detect rabie virus in human at the time of the bite or shortly thereafter .
once the virus have begin to replicate ( but before clinical symptom occur ) , the virus can be detect use an immunofluorescence test on cutaneous nerve find at the base of hair follicle .
saliva can also be test for viral genetic material by reverse transcription follow by polymerase chain reaction ( rt - pcr ) .
even when these test be perform , most suspect infection be treat as positive in the two  seven .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ rabies , wild animals , " two  zero  one  six .
accessed september one  three , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / rabie / location / usa / surveillance / wild_animals . html .
two  eight .
slate , dennis , charles e . rupprecht , jane a . rooney , dennis donovan , donald h . lein , and richard b . chipman , “ status of oral rabies vaccination in wild carnivores in the united states , " virus research one  one  one , no . one ( two  zero  zero  five )  six  eight - seven  six .
two  nine .
finnegan , christopher j . , sharon m . brookes , nicholas johnson , jemma smith , karen l . mansfield , victoria l . keene , lorraine m . mcelhinney , and anthony r . fooks , “ rabies in north america and europe , ” journal of the royal society of medicine nine  five ,
no .
one ( two  zero  zero  two ) 
nine - one  three .
http / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / article / pmc one  two  seven  nine  one  four  zero  / . chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  nine  three absence of contravene evidence .
- pron - be well that patient undergo unnecessary therapy because of a false - positive result , rather than die as the result of a false - negative result .
human rabie infection be treat by immunization with multiple dos of an attenuate vaccine to develop active immunity in the patient ( see the clinical focus feature in the chapter on acellular pathogens ) .
vaccination of an already - infect individual have the potential to work because of the slow progress of the disease , which allow time for the patient 's immune system to develop antibody against the virus .
patient may also be treat with human rabie immune globulin ( antibody to the rabie virus ) to encourage passive immunity .
these antibody will neutralize any free viral particle .
although the rabie infection progress slowly in peripheral tissue , patient be not normally able to mount a protective immune response on - pron - own .
figure two  six  .  one  five virion of the rabie virus have a characteristic bullet - like shape .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )

how do the bite from an infect animal transmit rabie ?

what be the goal of wildlife vaccination program for rabie ?

how be rabie treat in a human ?
poliomyelitis poliomyelitis ( polio ) , cause by poliovirus , be a primarily intestinal disease that , in a small percentage of case , proceed to the nervous system , cause paralysis and , potentially , death .
poliovirus be highly contagious , with transmission occur by the fecal - oral route or by aerosol or droplet transmission .
approximately seven  two % of all poliovirus infection be asymptomatic  another two  five % result only in mild intestinal disease , produce nausea , fever , and headache . [ three  zero ]
however , even in the absence of symptom , patient infect with the virus can shed - pron - in fece and oral secretion , potentially transmit the virus to other .
in about one case in every two  zero  zero , the poliovirus affect cell in the cns . [ three  one ] three  zero .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ global health – polio , " two  zero  one  four .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / polio / about / index . htm .
three  one .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ global health – polio , " two  zero  one  four .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / polio / about / index . htm .
one  one  nine  four chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
after - pron - enter through the mouth , initial replication of poliovirus occur at the site of implantation in the pharynx and gastrointestinal tract .
as the infection progress , poliovirus be usually present in the throat and in the stool before the onset of symptom .
one week after the onset of symptom , there be less poliovirus in the throat , but for several week , poliovirus continue to be excrete in the stool .
poliovirus invade local lymphoid tissue , enter the bloodstream , and then may infect cell of the cns .
replication of poliovirus in motor neuron of the anterior horn cell in the spinal cord , brain stem , or motor cortex result in cell destruction and lead to flaccid paralysis .
in severe case , this can involve the respiratory system , lead to death .
patient with impair respiratory function be treat use positivepressure ventilation system .
in the past , patient be sometimes confine to emerson respirator , also know as iron lung ( figure two  six  .  one  six ) .
direct detection of the poliovirus from the throat or fece can be achieve use reverse transcriptase pcr ( rt - pcr ) or genomic sequencing to identify the genotype of the poliovirus infect the patient .
serological test can be use to determine whether the patient have be previously vaccinate .
there be no therapeutic measure for polio  treatment be limit to various supportive measure .
these include pain reliever , rest , heat therapy to ease muscle spasm , physical therapy and corrective brace if necessary to help with walking , and mechanical ventilation to assist with breathe if necessary .
figure two  six  .  one  six ( a )
an emerson respiratory ( or iron lung ) that be use to help some polio victim to breathe .
( b
) polio can also result in impair motor function .
( credit b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
two different vaccine be introduce in the one  nine  five  zero that have lead to the dramatic decrease in polio worldwide ( figure two  six  .  one  seven ) .
the salk vaccine be an inactivated polio virus that be first introduce in one  nine  five  five .
this vaccine be deliver by intramuscular injection .
the sabin vaccine be an oral polio vaccine that contain an attenuated virus  - pron - be license for use in one  nine  six  two .
there be three serotype of poliovirus that cause disease in human  both the salk and the sabin vaccine be effective against all three .
attenuated virus from the sabin vaccine be shed in the fece of immunized individual and thus have the potential to infect nonimmunized individual .
by the late one  nine  nine  zero , the few polio case originate in the united states could be trace back to the sabin vaccine .
in these case , mutation of the attenuated virus follow vaccination likely allow the microbe to revert to a virulent form .
for this reason , the united states switch exclusively to the salk vaccine in two  zero  zero  zero .
because the salk vaccine contain an inactivated virus , there be no risk of transmission to other ( see vaccines ) .
currently four dos of the vaccine be recommend for child  at two , four , and six – one  eight month of age , and at four – six year of age .
in one  nine  eight  eight , who launch the global polio eradication initiative with the goal of eradicate polio worldwide through immunization .
that goal be now close to be realize .
polio be now endemic in only a few country , include afghanistan , pakistan , and nigeria , where vaccination effort have be disrupt by military conflict or political instability .
chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  nine  five figure two  six  .  one  seven ( a ) polio be cause by the poliovirus .
( b ) two american virologist develop the first polio vaccine  albert sabin ( leave ) and jonas salk ( right ) .
( credit a  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
the terror of polio
in the year afterworldwar ii , the united states and the soviet union enter a period know as the coldwar .
although there be no armed conflict , the two super power be diplomatically and economically isolate from each other , as represent by the so - call iron curtain between the soviet union and the rest of the world .
after one  nine  five  zero , migration or travel outside of the soviet union be exceedingly difficult , and - pron - be equally difficult for foreigner to enter the soviet union .
the united states also place strict limit on soviets enter the country .
during the eisenhower administration , only two  zero graduate student from the soviet union be allow to come to study in the united states per year .
yet even the iron curtain be no match for polio .
the salk vaccine become widely available in the west in one  nine  five  five , and by the time the sabin vaccine be ready for clinical trial , most of the susceptible population in the united states and canada have already be vaccinate against polio .
sabin need to look elsewhere for study participant .
at the height of the cold war , mikhail chumakov be allow to come to the united states to study sabin 's work .
likewise , sabin , an american microbiologist , be allow to travel to the soviet union to begin clinical trial .
chumakov organize soviet - base production and manage the experimental trial to test the new vaccine in the soviet union .
by one  nine  five  nine , over ten million soviet child have be safely treat with sabin 's vaccine .
as a result of a global vaccination campaign with the sabin vaccine , the overall incidence of polio have drop dramatically .
today , polio have be nearly eliminate around the world and be only rarely see in the united states .
perhaps one day soon , polio will become the third microbial disease to be eradicate from the general population [ small pox and rinderpest ( the cause of cattle plague ) be the first two] .  how be poliovirus transmit ?
micro connections one  one  nine  six chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
 compare the pro and con of each of the two polio vaccine .
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies acellular infectious agent call prion be responsible for a group of related disease know as transmissible spongiform encephalopathy ( tse ) that occur in human and other animal ( see viroids , virusoid , and prions ) .
all tse be degenerative , fatal neurological disease that occur when brain tissue become infect by prion .
these disease have a slow onset  symptom may not become apparent until after an incubation period of year and perhaps decade , but death usually occur within month to a few year after the first symptom appear .
tse in animal include scrapie , a disease in sheep that have be know since the one  seven  zero  zero , and chronic waste disease , a disease of deer and elk in the united states and canada .
mad cow disease be see in cattle and can be transmit to human through the consumption of infect nerve tissue .
human prion disease include creutzfeldt -
jakob disease and kuru , a rare disease endemic to papua new guinea .
prion be infectious proteinaceous particle that be not virus and do not contain nucleic acid .
- pron - be typically transmit by exposure to and ingestion of infect nervous system tissue , tissue transplant , blood transfusion , or contaminate fomite .
prion protein be normally find in a healthy brain tissue in a form call prpc .
however , if this protein be misfolde into a denature form ( prpsc ) , - pron - can cause disease .
although the exact function of prpc be not currently understand , the protein fold into mostly alpha helix and bind copper .
the rogue protein , on the other hand , fold predominantly into beta - pleat sheet and be resistant to proteolysis .
in addition , prpsc can induce prpc to become misfolde and produce more rogue protein ( figure two  six  .  one  eight ) .
as prpsc accumulate , - pron - aggregate and form fibril within nerve cell .
these protein complex ultimately cause the cell to die .
as a consequence , brain tissue of infect individual form mass of neurofibrillary tangle and amyloid plaque that give the brain a spongy appearance , which be why these disease be call spongiform encephalopathy ( figure six  .  two  six ) .
damage to brain tissue result in a variety of neurological symptom .
most commonly , affected individual suffer from memory loss , personality change , blur vision , uncoordinated movement , and insomnia .
these symptom gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death .
the gold standard for diagnose tse be the histological examination of brain biopsy for the presence of characteristic amyloid plaque , vacuole , and prion protein .
great care must be take by clinician when handle suspect prion - infect material to avoid become infect - pron - .
other tissue assay search for the presence of the one  four - three - three protein , a marker for prion disease like creutzfeldt - jakob disease .
new assay , like rt - quic ( realtime quaking - induce conversion ) , offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion protein in tissue earlier in the course of infection .
prion disease can not be cure .
however , some medication may help slow - pron - progress .
medical support be focus on keep patient as comfortable as possible despite progressive and debilitate symptom .
figure two  six  .  one  eight
the replicative cycle of misfolde prion protein .
chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  one  nine  seven because prion - contaminate material be potential source of infection for clinical scientist and physician
, both the world health organization ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two whoprion ) and cdc ( https / / www . openstax . org / l /  two  two cdcprion ) provide information to inform , educate and minimize the risk of infection due to prion .

do prion reproduce in the conventional sense ?

what be the connection between prion and the removal of animal byproduct from the food of farm animal ?
acellular infections of the nervous system serious consequence be the common thread among these neurological disease .
several cause debilitate paralysis , and some , such as creutzfeldt - jakob disease and rabie , be always or nearly always fatal .
since few drug be available to combat these infection , vector control and vaccination be critical for prevention and containment .
figure two  six  .  one  nine summarize some important viral and prion infection of the nervous system .
link to learning disease profile one  one  nine  eight chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  one  nine chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  one  nine  nine two  six  .  four fungal and parasitic diseases of the nervous system
learning objectives
 identify the most common fungi that can cause infection of the nervous system  compare the major characteristic of specific fungal disease affect the nervous system fungal infection of the nervous system , call neuromycose , be rare in healthy individual .
however , neuromycose can be devastating in immunocompromised or elderly patient .
several eukaryotic parasite be also capable of infect the nervous system of human host .
although relatively uncommon , these infection can also be life - threaten in immunocompromised individual .
in this section , - pron - will first discuss neuromycose , follow by parasitic infection of the nervous system .
cryptococcocal meningitis cryptococcus neoforman be a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis .
this yeast be commonly find in soil and be particularly associate with pigeon dropping .
- pron - have a thick capsule that serve as an important virulence factor , inhibit clearance by phagocytosis .
most c . neoforman case result in subclinical respiratory infection that , in healthy individual , generally resolve spontaneously with no long - term consequence ( see respiratory mycoses ) .
in immunocompromised patient or those with other underlie illness , the infection can progress to cause meningitis and granuloma formation in brain tissue .
cryptococcus antigen can also serve to inhibit cellmediated immunity and delay - type hypersensitivity .
cryptococcus can be easily culture in the laboratory and identify base on - pron - extensive capsule ( figure two  six  .  two  zero ) .
c . neoforman be frequently culture from urine sample of patient with disseminated infection .
prolonged treatment with antifungal drug be require to treat cryptococcal infection .
combined therapy be require with amphotericin b plus flucytosine for at least one  zero week .
many antifungal drug have difficulty cross the bloodbrain barrier and have strong side effect that necessitate low dos  these factor contribute to the lengthy time of treatment .
patient with aids be particularly susceptible to cryptococcus infection because of - pron - compromise immune state .
aids patient with cryptococcosis can also be treat with antifungal drug , but - pron - often have relapse  lifelong dos of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection .
figure two  six  .  two  zero
an india ink - negative stain of c . neoforman show the thick capsule around the spherical yeast cell .
( credit  modification of work by centers for disease control and prevention )
one  two  zero  zero chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five 
why be neuromycose infection rare in the general population ?

how be a cryptococcal infection acquire ?
neuromycoses neuromycoses typically occur only in immunocompromised individual and usually only invade the nervous system after first infect a different body system .
as such , many disease that sometimes affect the nervous system have already be discuss in previous chapter .
figure two  six  .  two  one present some of the most common fungal infection associate with neurological disease .
this table include only the neurological aspect associate with these disease  - pron - do not include characteristic associate with other body system .
figure two  six  .  two  one resolution david 's new prescription for two antifungal drug , amphotericin b and flucytosine , prove effective , and - pron - condition begin to improve .
culture result from david 's sputum , skin , and csf sample confirm a fungal infection .
all be positive for c . neoforman .
serological test of - pron - tissue be also positive for the c . neoformans capsular polysaccharide antigen .
disease profile clinical focus chapter two  six

nervous system infections one  two  zero  one
since c . neoforman be know to occur in bird dropping , - pron - be likely that david have be expose to the fungus while work on the barn .
despite this exposure , david 's doctor explain to - pron - that immunocompetent people rarely contract cryptococcal meningitis and that - pron - immune system have likely be compromise by the anti - inflammatory medication - pron - be take to treat - pron - crohn 's disease .
however , to rule out other possible cause of immunodeficiency , david 's doctor recommend that - pron - be test for hiv .
after david test negative for hiv , - pron - doctor take - pron - off the corticosteroid - pron - be use to manage - pron - crohn 's disease , replace - pron - with a different class of drug .
after several week of antifungal treatment , david manage a full recovery .
jump to the previous clinical focus box .
amoebic meningitis primary amoebic meningoencephalitis ( pam ) be cause by naegleria fowleri .
this amoeboflagellate be commonly find free - living in soil and water .
- pron - can exist in one of three form -
the infective amoebic trophozoite form , a motile flagellate form , and a rest cyst form .
pam be a rare disease that have be associate with young and otherwise healthy individual .
individual be typically infect by the amoeba while swim in warm body of freshwater such as river , lake , and hot spring .
the pathogenic trophozoite infect the brain by initially enter through nasal passage to the sinus  - pron - then move down olfactory nerve fiber to penetrate the submucosal nervous plexus , invade the cribriform plate , and reach the subarachnoid space .
the subarachnoid space be highly vascularized and be a route of dissemination of trophozoite to other area of the cns , include the brain ( figure two  six  .  two  two ) .
inflammation and destruction of gray matter lead to severe headache and fever .
within day , confusion and convulsion occur and quickly progress to seizure , coma , and death .
the progression can be very rapid , and the disease be often not diagnose until autopsy .
n . fowleri infection can be confirm by direct observation of csf  the amoebae can often be see move while view a fresh csf wet mount through a microscope .
flagellated form can occasionally also be find in csf .
the amoebae can be stain with several stain for identification , include giemsa - wright or a modified trichrome stain .
detection of antigen with indirect immunofluorescence , or genetic analysis with pcr , can be use to confirm an initial diagnosis .
n . fowleri infection be nearly always fatal  only three of one  three  eight patient with pam in the united states have survived . [ three  two ]
a new experimental drug call miltefosine show some promise for treat these infection .
this drug be a phosphotidylcholine derivative that be think to inhibit membrane function in n . fowleri , trigger apoptosis and disturbance of lipid - dependent cell signal pathways . [ three  three ]
when administer early in infection and couple with therapeutic hypothermia ( lower the body 's core temperature to reduce the cerebral edema associate with infection ) , this drug have be successfully use to treat primary amoebic encephalitis .
three  two .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ naegleria fowleri
- primary amoebic meningoencephalitis
( pam ) -amebic encephalitis , " two  zero  one  six .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / naegleria / treatment . html .
three  three .
dorlo , thomas pc , manica balasegaram , jos h . beijnen , and peter j . de vries , “ miltefosine 
a review of - pron - pharmacology and therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of leishmaniasis , " journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy six  seven ,
no .
one  one ( two  zero  one  two ) 
two  five  seven  six
- nine  seven . one  two  zero  two chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  two  two free - living amoeba in human brain tissue from a patient suffering from pam .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )
granulomatous amoebic encephalitis acanthamoeba and balamuthia specie be free - living amoebae find in many body of fresh water .
human infection by these amoebae be rare .
however , - pron - can cause amoebic keratitis in contact lens wearer ( see protozoan and helminthic infections of the eyes ) , disseminated infection in immunocompromised patient , and granulomatous amoebic encephalitis ( gae ) in severe case .
compare to pam , gae tend to be subacute infection .
the microbe be think to enter through either the nasal sinuse or break in the skin .
- pron - be disseminate hematogenously and can invade the cns .
there , the infection lead to inflammation , formation of lesion , and development of typical neurological symptom of encephalitis ( figure two  six  .  two  three ) .
gae be nearly always fatal .
gae be often not diagnose until late in the infection .
lesion cause by the infection can be detect use ct or mri .
the live amoebae can be directly detect in csf or tissue biopsy .
serological test be available but generally be not necessary to make a correct diagnosis , since the presence of the organism in csf be definitive .
some antifungal drug , like fluconazole , have be use to treat acanthamoebal infection .
in addition , a combination of miltefosine and voriconazole ( an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis ) have recently be use to successfully treat gae .
even with treatment , however , the mortality rate for patient with these infection be high .
figure two  six  .  two  three ( a ) brain tissue from a patient who die of granulomatous amebic encephalitis ( gae ) cause by balamuthia mandrillaris .
( b )
a close - up of the necrosis in the center of the brain section .
( credit a , b  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention ) chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  two  zero  three

how be granulomatous amoebic encephalitis diagnose ?
human african trypanosomiasis human african trypanosomiasis ( also know as african sleep sickness ) be a serious disease endemic to two distinct region in sub - saharan africa .
- pron - be cause by the insect - borne hemoflagellate trypanosoma brucei .
the subspecie trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense cause east african trypanosomiasis ( eat ) , and another subspecie , trypanosoma brucei gambiense cause west african trypanosomiasis ( wat ) .
a few hundred case of eat be currently report each year . [ three  four ]
wat be more commonly report and tend to be a more chronic disease .
around seven  zero  zero  zero to one  zero  ,  zero  zero  zero new case of wat be identify each year . [ three  five ]
t . brucei be primarily transmit to human by the bite of the tsetse fly ( glossina spp . ) .
soon after the bite of a tsetse fly , a chancre form at the site of infection .
the flagellate then spread , move into the circulatory system ( figure two  six  .  two  four ) .
these systemic infection result in an undulating fever , during which symptom persist for two or three day with remission of about a week between bout .
as the disease enter - pron - final phase , the pathogen move from the lymphatic into the cns .
neurological symptom include daytime sleepiness , insomnia , and mental deterioration .
in eat , the disease run - pron - course over a span of week to month .
in contrast , wat often occur over a span of month to year .
although a strong immune response be mount against the trypanosome , - pron - be not sufficient to eliminate the pathogen .
through antigenic variation , trypanosoma can change - pron - surface protein into over one  zero  zero serological type .
this variation lead to the undulating form of the initial disease .
the initial septicemia cause by the infection lead to high fever .
as the immune system respond to the infection , the number of organism decrease , and the clinical symptom abate .
however , a subpopulation of the pathogen then alter - pron - surface coat antigen by antigenic variation and evade the immune response .
these flagellate rapidly proliferate and cause another bout of disease .
if untreated , these infection be usually fatal .
clinical symptom can be use to recognize the early sign of african trypanosomiasis .
these include the formation of a chancre at the site of infection andwinterbottom 's sign .
winterbottom 's sign refer to the enlargement of lymph node on the back of the neck - often indicative of cerebral infection .
trypanosoma can be directly observe in stain sample include blood , lymph , csf , and skin biopsy of chancre from patient .
antibody against the parasite be find in most patient with acute or chronic disease .
serologic testing be generally not use for diagnosis , however , since the microscopic detection of the parasite be sufficient .
early diagnosis be important for treatment .
before the nervous system be involve , drug like pentamidine ( an inhibitor of nuclear metabolism ) and suramin ( mechanism unclear ) can be use .
these drug have few side effect than the drug need to treat the second stage of the disease .
once the sleep sickness phase have begin , harsh drug include melarsoprol ( an arsenic derivative ) and eflornithine can be effective .
follow successful treatment , patient still need to have follow - up examination of - pron - csf for two year to detect possible relapse of the disease .
the most effective mean of prevent these disease be to control the insect vector population .
three  four .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ parasites – african trypanosomiasis ( also know as sleeping sickness ) , east african trypanosomiasis faq , " two  zero  one  two .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / sleepingsickness / gen_info / faqs - east . html .
three  five .
us centers for disease control and prevention , “ parasites – african trypanosomiasis ( also know as sleeping sickness ) , epidemiology and risk factors , " two  zero  one  two .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / www . cdc . gov / parasites / sleepingsickness / epi . html .
one  two  zero  four chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  two  four trypanosoma brucei , the causative agent of african sleep sickness , in a human blood smear .
( credit  modification of work by the centers for disease control and prevention )

what be the symptom of a systemic trypanosoma infection ?

what be the symptom of a neurological trypanosoma infection ?

why be trypanosome infection so difficult to eradicate ?
neurotoxoplasmosis toxoplasma gondii be an ubiquitous intracellular parasite that can cause neonatal infection .
cat be the definitive host , and human can become infected after eat infect meat or , more commonly , by ingest oocyst shed in the fece of cat ( see parasitic infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems ) .
t . gondii enter the circulatory system by pass between the endothelial cell of blood vessels . [ three  six ] most case of toxoplasmosis be asymptomatic .
however , in immunocompromised patient , neurotoxoplasmosis cause by t . gondii infection be one of the most common cause of brain abscesses . [ three  seven ]
the organism be able to cross the blood - brain barrier by infect the endothelial cell of capillary in the brain .
the parasite reproduce within these cell , a step that appear to be necessary for entry to the brain , and then cause the endothelial cell to lyse , release the progeny into brain tissue .
this mechanism be quite different than the method - pron - use to enter the bloodstream in the first place . [ three  eight ]
the brain lesion associate with neurotoxoplasmosis can be detect radiographically use mri or cat scan ( figure two  six  .  two  five ) .
diagnosis can be confirm by direct observation of the organism in csf .
rt - pcr assay can also be use to detect t . gondii through genetic marker .
treatment of neurotoxoplasmosis cause by t . gondii infection require six week of multi - drug therapy with pyrimethamine , sulfadiazine , and folinic acid .
long - term maintenance dos be often require to prevent recurrence .
three  six .
carruther , vern b . , and yasuhiro suzuki , “ effects of toxoplasma gondii infection on the brain , ” schizophrenia bulletin three  three , no .
three ( two  zero  zero  seven )  seven  four  five - five  one . three  seven .
uppal , gulshan , “ cns toxoplasmosis in hiv , " two  zero  one  five .
access june three  zero , two  zero  one  six .
http / / emedicine . medscape . com / article / one  one  six  seven  two  nine  eight  - overview#a three .
three  eight .
konradt , christoph , norikiyo ueno , david a . christian , jonathan h . delong , gretchen harms pritchard , jasmin herz , david j . bzik
et al .
, “ endothelial cell be a replicative niche for entry of toxoplasma gondii to the central nervous system , "
nature microbiology one ( two  zero  one  six )  one  six  zero  zero  one .
chapter two  six
 nervous system infections one  two  zero  five figure two  six  .  two  five
this toxoplasma gondii cyst , observe in mouse brain tissue , contain thousand of inactive parasite .
( credit  modification of work by usda )

under what condition be toxoplasma infection serious ?

how do toxoplasma circumvent the blood - brain barrier ?
neurocysticercosis cysticercosis be a parasitic infection cause by the larval form of the pork tapeworm , taenia solium .
when the larvae invade the brain and spinal cord , the condition be refer to as neurocysticercosis .
this condition affect million of people worldwide and be the lead cause of adult onset epilepsy in the develop world . [ three  nine ]
the life cycle of t . solium be discuss in helminthic infections of the gastrointestinal tract .
follow ingestion , the egg hatch in the intestine to form larvae call cysticercus .
adult tapeworm form in the small intestine and produce egg that be shed in the fece .
these egg can infect other individual through fecal contamination of food or other surface .
eggs can also hatch within the intestine of the original patient and lead to an ongoing autoinfection .
the cystercerci , can migrate to the blood and invade many tissue in the body , include the cns .
neurocysticercosis be usually diagnose through noninvasive technique .
epidemiological information can be use as an initial screen  cysticercosis be endemic in central and south america , africa , and asia .
radiological image ( mri and ct scan ) be the primary method use to diagnose neurocysticercosis  imaging can be use to detect the one - to two - centimeter cyst that form around the parasite ( figure two  six  .  two  six ) .
elevated level of eosinophil in the blood can also indicate a parasitic infection .
eia and elisa be also use to detect antigen associate with the pathogen .
three  nine .
degiorgio , christopher m . , marco t . medina , reyna durón , chi zee , and susan pietsch escueta ,
“ neurocysticercosis , " epilepsy currents four , no .
three ( two  zero  zero  four ) 
one  zero  seven - one  one . one  two  zero  six chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five figure two  six  .  two  six brain ct scan of sagittal ( leave ) and axial ( right ) section of a brain with neurocysticercosis .
numerous cyst be visible in both image , as indicate by the arrow .
( credit  modification of work by segamwenge il , kioko np )
the treatment for neurocysticercosis depend on the location , number , size , and stage of cysticercus present .
antihelminthic chemotherapy include albendazole and praziquantel .
because these drug kill viable cyst , - pron - may acutely increase symptom by provoke an inflammatory response cause by the release of taenia cysticerci antigen , as the cyst be destroy by the drug .
to alleviate this response , corticosteroid that cross the blood - brain barrier ( e . g . , dexamethasone ) can be use to mitigate these effect .
surgical intervention may be require to remove intraventricular cyst .
parasitic diseases of the nervous system parasites that successfully invade the nervous system can cause a wide range of neurological sign and symptom .
often , - pron - inflict lesion that can be visualize through radiologic imaging .
a number of these infection be fatal , but some can be treat ( with vary level of success ) by antimicrobial drug ( figure two  six  .  two  seven ) .
disease profile chapter two  six  nervous system infections one  two  zero  seven figure two  six  .  two  seven

what neurological condition be associate with neurocysticercosis ?

how be neurocysticercosis diagnose ?
summary two  six  .  one anatomy of the nervous system

the nervous system consist of two subsystem  the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system .

the skull and three meninge ( the dura mater , arachnoid mater , and pia mater ) protect the brain .

tissues of the pns and cns be form of cell call glial cell and neuron .

since the blood - brain barrier exclude most microbe , there be no normal microbiota in the cns .

some pathogen have specific virulence factor that allow - pron - to breach the blood - brain barrier .
inflammation of the brain or meninge cause by infection be call encephalitis or meningitis , respectively .
one  two  zero  eight chapter two  six
 nervous system infections
this openstax book be available for free at http / / cnx . org / content / col one  two  zero  eight  seven  /  one  .  five
these condition can lead to blindness , deafness , coma , and death .
two  six  .  two bacterial diseases of the nervous system

bacterial meningitis can be cause by several specie of encapsulate bacteria , include haemophilus influenzae , neisseria meningitidis , streptococcus pneumoniae , and streptococcus agalactiae
( group b streptococci ) .
h . influenzae affect primarily young child and neonate , n . meningitidis be the only communicable pathogen and mostly affect child and young adult , s . pneumoniae affect mostly young child , and s . agalactiae affect newborn during or shortly after birth .
 symptom of bacterial meningitis include fever , neck stiffness , headache , confusion , convulsion , coma , and death .

diagnosis of bacterial meningitis be make through observation and culture of organism in csf .
bacterial meningitis be treat with antibiotic .
h . influenzae and n . meningitidis have vaccine available .

clostridium specie cause neurological disease , include botulism and tetanus , by produce potent neurotoxin that interfere with neurotransmitter release .
the pns be typically affect .
treatment of clostridium infection be effective only through early diagnosis with administration of antibiotic to control the infection and antitoxin to neutralize the endotoxin before - pron - enter cell .

listeria monocytogene be a foodborne pathogen that can infect the cns , cause meningitis .
the infection can be spread through the placenta to a fetus .
diagnosis be through culture of blood or csf .
treatment be with antibiotic and there be no vaccine .

hansen 's disease ( leprosy ) be cause by the intracellular parasite mycobacterium leprae .
infection cause demylenation of neuron , result in decreased sensation in peripheral appendage and body site .
treatment be with multi - drug antibiotic therapy , and there be no universally recognize vaccine .
two  six  .  three acellular diseases of the nervous system 
viral meningitis be more common and generally less severe than bacterial menigitis .
- pron - can result from secondary sequelae of many virus or be cause by infection of arbovirus .
 various type of arboviral encephalitis be concentrate in particular geographic location throughout the world .
these mosquito - bear viral infection of the nervous system be typically mild , but - pron - can be lifethreatene in some case .

zika virus be an emerge arboviral infection with generally mild symptom in most individual , but infection of pregnant woman can cause the birth defect microcephaly .

polio be typically a mild intestinal infection but can be damaging or fatal if - pron - progress to a neurological disease .

rabies be nearly always fatal when untreated and remain a significant problem worldwide .

transmissible spongiform encephalopathy such as creutzfeldt - jakob disease and kuru be cause by prion .
these disease be untreatable and ultimately fatal .
similar prion disease be find in animal .
two  six  .  four fungal and parasitic diseases of the nervous system

neuromycoses be uncommon in immunocompetent people , but immunocompromise individual with fungal infection have high mortality rate .
treatment of neuromycose require prolonged therapy with antifungal drug at low dos to avoid side effect and overcome the effect of the blood - brain barrier .

some protist infection of the nervous system be fatal if not treat , include primary amoebic meningitis , granulomatous amoebic encephalitis , human african trypanosomiasis , and neurotoxoplasmosis .

the various form of ameobic encephalitis cause by the different amoebic infection be typically fatal even with treatment , but - pron - be rare .

african trypanosomiasis be a serious but treatable disease endemic to two distinct region in sub - saharan africa cause by the insect - borne hemoflagellate trypanosoma brucei .

neurocysticercosis be treat use antihelminthic drug or surgery to remove the large cyst from the cns .
