Chapter 18Adaptive Specific Host DefensesFigure 18.1 Polio was once a common disease with potentially serious consequences, including paralysis.Vaccination has all but eliminated the disease from most countries around the world. An iron-lung ward, such as theone shown in this 1953 photograph, housed patients paralyzed from polio and unable to breathe for themselves.Chapter Outline18.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and Antigen-Presenting Cells18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular Immunity18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity18.5 VaccinesIntroductionPeople living in developed nations and born in the 1960s or later may have difficulty understanding the once heavyburden of devastating infectious diseases. For example, smallpox, a deadly viral disease, once destroyed entirecivilizations but has since been eradicated. Thanks to the vaccination efforts by multiple groups, including the WorldHealth Organization, Rotary International, and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), smallpox has notbeen diagnosed in a patient since 1977. Polio is another excellent example. This crippling viral disease paralyzedpatients, who were often kept alive in “iron lung wards” as recently as the 1950s (Figure 18.1). Today, vaccinationagainst polio has nearly eradicated the disease. Vaccines have also reduced the prevalence of once-common infectiousdiseases such as chickenpox, German measles, measles, mumps, and whooping cough. The success of these and othervaccines is due to the very specific and adaptive host defenses that are the focus of this chapter.Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses described innate immunity against microbial pathogens. Higher animals,such as humans, also possess an adaptive immune defense, which is highly specific for individual microbialpathogens. This specific adaptive immunity is acquired through active infection or vaccination and serves as animportant defense against pathogens that evade the defenses of innate immunity.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 77718.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive ImmunityLearning Objectives• Define memory, primary response, secondary response, and specificity• Distinguish between humoral and cellular immunity• Differentiate between antigens, epitopes, and haptens• Describe the structure and function of antibodies and distinguish between the different classes of antibodiesAdaptive immunity is defined by two important characteristics: specificity and memory. Specificity refers to theadaptive immune system’s ability to target specific pathogens, and memory refers to its ability to quickly respond topathogens to which it has previously been exposed. For example, when an individual recovers from chickenpox, thebody develops a memory of the infection that will specifically protect it from the causative agent, the varicella-zostervirus, if it is exposed to the virus again later.Specificity and memory are achieved by essentially programming certain cells involved in the immune response torespond rapidly to subsequent exposures of the pathogen. This programming occurs as a result of the first exposure toa pathogen or vaccine, which triggers a primary response. Subsequent exposures result in a secondary response thatis faster and stronger as a result of the body’s memory of the first exposure (Figure 18.2). This secondary response,however, is specific to the pathogen in question. For example, exposure to one virus (e.g., varicella-zoster virus) willnot provide protection against other viral diseases (e.g., measles, mumps, or polio).Adaptive specific immunity involves the actions of two distinct cell types: B lymphocytes (B cells) and Tlymphocytes (T cells). Although B cells and T cells arise from a common hematopoietic stem cell differentiationpathway (see Figure 17.12), their sites of maturation and their roles in adaptive immunity are very different.B cells mature in the bone marrow and are responsible for the production of glycoproteins called antibodies, orimmunoglobulins. Antibodies are involved in the body’s defense against pathogens and toxins in the extracellularenvironment. Mechanisms of adaptive specific immunity that involve B cells and antibody production are referred toas humoral immunity. The maturation of T cells occurs in the thymus. T cells function as the central orchestratorof both innate and adaptive immune responses. They are also responsible for destruction of cells infected withintracellular pathogens. The targeting and destruction of intracellular pathogens by T cells is called cell-mediatedimmunity, or cellular immunity.Part 1Olivia, a one-year old infant, is brought to the emergency room by her parents, who report her symptoms:excessive crying, irritability, sensitivity to light, unusual lethargy, and vomiting. A physician feels swollen lymphnodes in Olivia’s throat and armpits. In addition, the area of the abdomen over the spleen is swollen and tender.• What do these symptoms suggest?• What tests might be ordered to try to diagnose the problem?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus778 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.2 This graph illustrates the primary and secondary immune responses related to antibody production afteran initial and secondary exposure to an antigen. Notice that the secondary response is faster and provides a muchhigher concentration of antibody.• List the two defining characteristics of adaptive immunity.• Explain the difference between a primary and secondary immune response.• How do humoral and cellular immunity differ?AntigensActivation of the adaptive immune defenses is triggered by pathogen-specific molecular structures called antigens.Antigens are similar to the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) discussed in Pathogen Recognitionand Phagocytosis; however, whereas PAMPs are molecular structures found on numerous pathogens, antigens areunique to a specific pathogen. The antigens that stimulate adaptive immunity to chickenpox, for example, are uniqueto the varicella-zoster virus but significantly different from the antigens associated with other viral pathogens.The term antigen was initially used to describe molecules that stimulate the production of antibodies; in fact, the termcomes from a combination of the words antibody and generator, and a molecule that stimulates antibody productionis said to be antigenic. However, the role of antigens is not limited to humoral immunity and the production ofantibodies; antigens also play an essential role in stimulating cellular immunity, and for this reason antigens aresometimes more accurately referred to as immunogens. In this text, however, we will typically refer to them asantigens.Pathogens possess a variety of structures that may contain antigens. For example, antigens from bacterial cells maybe associated with their capsules, cell walls, fimbriae, flagella, or pili. Bacterial antigens may also be associated withextracellular toxins and enzymes that they secrete. Viruses possess a variety of antigens associated with their capsids,envelopes, and the spike structures they use for attachment to cells.Antigens may belong to any number of molecular classes, including carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, proteins,and combinations of these molecules. Antigens of different classes vary in their ability to stimulate adaptive immunedefenses as well as in the type of response they stimulate (humoral or cellular). The structural complexity of anantigenic molecule is an important factor in its antigenic potential. In general, more complex molecules are moreeffective as antigens. For example, the three-dimensional complex structure of proteins make them the most effectiveand potent antigens, capable of stimulating both humoral and cellular immunity. In comparison, carbohydrates areChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 779less complex in structure and therefore less effective as antigens; they can only stimulate humoral immune defenses.Lipids and nucleic acids are the least antigenic molecules, and in some cases may only become antigenic whencombined with proteins or carbohydrates to form glycolipids, lipoproteins, or nucleoproteins.One reason the three-dimensional complexity of antigens is so important is that antibodies and T cells do notrecognize and interact with an entire antigen but with smaller exposed regions on the surface of antigens calledepitopes. A single antigen may possess several different epitopes (Figure 18.3), and different antibodies may bindto different epitopes on the same antigen (Figure 18.4). For example, the bacterial flagellum is a large, complexprotein structure that can possess hundreds or even thousands of epitopes with unique three-dimensional structures.Moreover, flagella from different bacterial species (or even strains of the same species) contain unique epitopes thatcan only be bound by specific antibodies.An antigen’s size is another important factor in its antigenic potential. Whereas large antigenic structures like flagellapossess multiple epitopes, some molecules are too small to be antigenic by themselves. Such molecules, calledhaptens, are essentially free epitopes that are not part of the complex three-dimensional structure of a larger antigen.For a hapten to become antigenic, it must first attach to a larger carrier molecule (usually a protein) to producea conjugate antigen. The hapten-specific antibodies produced in response to the conjugate antigen are then ableto interact with unconjugated free hapten molecules. Haptens are not known to be associated with any specificpathogens, but they are responsible for some allergic responses. For example, the hapten urushiol, a molecule foundin the oil of plants that cause poison ivy, causes an immune response that can result in a severe rash (called contactdermatitis). Similarly, the hapten penicillin can cause allergic reactions to drugs in the penicillin class.Figure 18.3 An antigen is a macromolecule that reacts with components of the immune system. A given antigenmay contain several motifs that are recognized by immune cells.780 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.4 A typical protein antigen has multiple epitopes, shown by the ability of three different antibodies to bindto different epitopes of the same antigen.• What is the difference between an antigen and an epitope?• What factors affect an antigen’s antigenic potential?• Why are haptens typically not antigenic, and how do they become antigenic?AntibodiesAntibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are glycoproteins that are present in both the blood and tissue fluids. Thebasic structure of an antibody monomer consists of four protein chains held together by disulfide bonds (Figure18.5). A disulfide bond is a covalent bond between the sulfhydryl R groups found on two cysteine amino acids.The two largest chains are identical to each other and are called the heavy chains. The two smaller chains are alsoidentical to each other and are called the light chains. Joined together, the heavy and light chains form a basic Yshapedstructure.The two ‘arms’ of the Y-shaped antibody molecule are known as the Fab region, for “fragment of antigen binding.”The far end of the Fab region is the variable region, which serves as the site of antigen binding. The amino acidsequence in the variable region dictates the three-dimensional structure, and thus the specific three-dimensionalepitope to which the Fab region is capable of binding. Although the epitope specificity of the Fab regions is identicalfor each arm of a single antibody molecule, this region displays a high degree of variability between antibodies withdifferent epitope specificities. Binding to the Fab region is necessary for neutralization of pathogens, agglutination orChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 781aggregation of pathogens, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.The constant region of the antibody molecule includes the trunk of the Y and lower portion of each arm of the Y.The trunk of the Y is also called the Fc region, for “fragment of crystallization,” and is the site of complement factorbinding and binding to phagocytic cells during antibody-mediated opsonization.Figure 18.5 (a) The typical four-chain structure of a generic antibody monomer. (b) The corresponding threedimensionalstructure of the antibody IgG. (credit b: modification of work by Tim Vickers)• Describe the different functions of the Fab region and the Fc region.Antibody ClassesThe constant region of an antibody molecule determines its class, or isotype. The five classes of antibodies are IgG,IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE. Each class possesses unique heavy chains designated by Greek letters γ, μ, α, δ, and ε,respectively. Antibody classes also exhibit important differences in abundance in serum, arrangement, body sites ofaction, functional roles, and size (Figure 18.6).IgG is a monomer that is by far the most abundant antibody in human blood, accounting for about 80% of total serumantibody. IgG penetrates efficiently into tissue spaces, and is the only antibody class with the ability to cross theplacental barrier, providing passive immunity to the developing fetus during pregnancy. IgG is also the most versatileantibody class in terms of its role in the body’s defense against pathogens.IgM is initially produced in a monomeric membrane-bound form that serves as an antigen-binding receptor on Bcells. The secreted form of IgM assembles into a pentamer with five monomers of IgM bound together by a proteinstructure called the J chain. Although the location of the J chain relative to the Fc regions of the five monomersprevents IgM from performing some of the functions of IgG, the ten available Fab sites associated with a pentamericIgM make it an important antibody in the body’s arsenal of defenses. IgM is the first antibody produced and secretedby B cells during the primary and secondary immune responses, making pathogen-specific IgM a valuable diagnosticmarker during active or recent infections.IgA accounts for about 13% of total serum antibody, and secretory IgA is the most common and abundant antibodyclass found in the mucus secretions that protect the mucous membranes. IgA can also be found in other secretionssuch as breast milk, tears, and saliva. Secretory IgA is assembled into a dimeric form with two monomers joined by aprotein structure called the secretory component. One of the important functions of secretory IgA is to trap pathogens782 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5in mucus so that they can later be eliminated from the body.Similar to IgM, IgD is a membrane-bound monomer found on the surface of B cells, where it serves as an antigenbindingreceptor. However, IgD is not secreted by B cells, and only trace amounts are detected in serum. These traceamounts most likely come from the degradation of old B cells and the release of IgD molecules from their cytoplasmicmembranes.IgE is the least abundant antibody class in serum. Like IgG, it is secreted as a monomer, but its role in adaptiveimmunity is restricted to anti-parasitic defenses. The Fc region of IgE binds to basophils and mast cells. TheFab region of the bound IgE then interacts with specific antigen epitopes, causing the cells to release potent proinflammatorymediators. The inflammatory reaction resulting from the activation of mast cells and basophils aids inthe defense against parasites, but this reaction is also central to allergic reactions (see Diseases of the ImmuneSystem.Figure 18.6Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 783• What part of an antibody molecule determines its class?• What class of antibody is involved in protection against parasites?• Describe the difference in structure between IgM and IgG.Antigen-Antibody InteractionsDifferent classes of antibody play important roles in the body’s defense against pathogens. These functions includeneutralization of pathogens, opsonization for phagocytosis, agglutination, complement activation, and antibodydependentcell-mediated cytotoxicity. For most of these functions, antibodies also provide an important link betweenadaptive specific immunity and innate nonspecific immunity.Neutralization involves the binding of certain antibodies (IgG, IgM, or IgA) to epitopes on the surface of pathogensor toxins, preventing their attachment to cells. For example, Secretory IgA can bind to specific pathogens and blockinitial attachment to intestinal mucosal cells. Similarly, specific antibodies can bind to certain toxins, blocking themfrom attaching to target cells and thus neutralizing their toxic effects. Viruses can be neutralized and prevented frominfecting a cell by the same mechanism (Figure 18.7).As described in Chemical Defenses, opsonization is the coating of a pathogen with molecules, such as complementfactors, C-reactive protein, and serum amyloid A, to assist in phagocyte binding to facilitate phagocytosis. IgGantibodies also serve as excellent opsonins, binding their Fab sites to specific epitopes on the surface of pathogens.Phagocytic cells such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils have receptors on their surfaces that recognizeand bind to the Fc portion of the IgG molecules; thus, IgG helps such phagocytes attach to and engulf the pathogensthey have bound (Figure 18.8).Agglutination or aggregation involves the cross-linking of pathogens by antibodies to create large aggregates(Figure 18.9). IgG has two Fab antigen-binding sites, which can bind to two separate pathogen cells, clumping themtogether. When multiple IgG antibodies are involved, large aggregates can develop; these aggregates are easier forthe kidneys and spleen to filter from the blood and easier for phagocytes to ingest for destruction. The pentamericstructure of IgM provides ten Fab binding sites per molecule, making it the most efficient antibody for agglutination.Figure 18.7 Neutralization involves the binding of specific antibodies to antigens found on bacteria, viruses, andtoxins, preventing them from attaching to target cells.784 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.8 Antibodies serve as opsonins and inhibit infection by tagging pathogens for destruction bymacrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils. These phagocytic cells use Fc receptors to bind to IgG-opsonizedpathogens and initiate the first step of attachment before phagocytosis.Figure 18.9 Antibodies, especially IgM antibodies, agglutinate bacteria by binding to epitopes on two or morebacteria simultaneously. When multiple pathogens and antibodies are present, aggregates form when the bindingsites of antibodies bind with separate pathogens.Another important function of antibodies is activation of the complement cascade. As discussed in the previouschapter, the complement system is an important component of the innate defenses, promoting the inflammatoryresponse, recruiting phagocytes to site of infection, enhancing phagocytosis by opsonization, and killing gramnegativebacterial pathogens with the membrane attack complex (MAC). Complement activation can occur throughthree different pathways (see Figure 17.9), but the most efficient is the classical pathway, which requires the initialbinding of IgG or IgM antibodies to the surface of a pathogen cell, allowing for recruitment and activation of the C1complex.Yet another important function of antibodies is antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), whichenhances killing of pathogens that are too large to be phagocytosed. This process is best characterized for naturalkiller cells (NK cells), as shown in Figure 18.10, but it can also involve macrophages and eosinophils. ADCC occursChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 785when the Fab region of an IgG antibody binds to a large pathogen; Fc receptors on effector cells (e.g., NK cells) thenbind to the Fc region of the antibody, bringing them into close proximity with the target pathogen. The effector cellthen secretes powerful cytotoxins (e.g., perforin and granzymes) that kill the pathogen.Figure 18.10 In this example of ADCC, antibodies bind to a large pathogenic cell that is too big for phagocytosis andthen bind to Fc receptors on the membrane of a natural killer cell. This interaction brings the NK cell into closeproximity, where it can kill the pathogen through release of lethal extracellular cytotoxins.• Where is IgA normally found?• Which class of antibody crosses the placenta, providing protection to the fetus?• Compare the mechanisms of opsonization and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and Antigen-Presenting CellsLearning Objectives• Identify cells that express MHC I and/or MHC II molecules and describe the structures and cellular location ofMHC I and MHC II molecules• Identify the cells that are antigen-presenting cells• Describe the process of antigen processing and presentation with MHC I and MHC IIAs discussed in Cellular Defenses, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are expressed on thesurface of healthy cells, identifying them as normal and “self” to natural killer (NK) cells. MHC molecules also playan important role in the presentation of foreign antigens, which is a critical step in the activation of T cells and thusan important mechanism of the adaptive immune system.Major Histocompatibility Complex MoleculesThe major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a collection of genes coding for MHC molecules found on thesurface of all nucleated cells of the body. In humans, the MHC genes are also referred to as human leukocyte antigen(HLA) genes. Mature red blood cells, which lack a nucleus, are the only cells that do not express MHC molecules ontheir surface.786 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5There are two classes of MHC molecules involved in adaptive immunity, MHC I and MHC II (Figure 18.11).MHC I molecules are found on all nucleated cells; they present normal self-antigens as well as abnormal or nonselfpathogens to the effector T cells involved in cellular immunity. In contrast, MHC II molecules are only found onmacrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells; they present abnormal or nonself pathogen antigens for the initial activationof T cells.Both types of MHC molecules are transmembrane glycoproteins that assemble as dimers in the cytoplasmicmembrane of cells, but their structures are quite different. MHC I molecules are composed of a longer α protein chaincoupled with a smaller β2 microglobulin protein, and only the α chain spans the cytoplasmic membrane. The α chainof the MHC I molecule folds into three separate domains: α1, α2 and α3. MHC II molecules are composed of twoprotein chains (an α and a β chain) that are approximately similar in length. Both chains of the MHC II moleculepossess portions that span the plasma membrane, and each chain folds into two separate domains: α1 and α2, and β1,and β2. In order to present abnormal or non-self-antigens to T cells, MHC molecules have a cleft that serves as theantigen-binding site near the “top” (or outermost) portion of the MHC-I or MHC-II dimer. For MHC I, the antigenbindingcleft is formed by the α1 and α2 domains, whereas for MHC II, the cleft is formed by the α1 and β1 domains(Figure 18.11).Figure 18.11 MHC I are found on all nucleated body cells, and MHC II are found on macrophages, dendritic cells,and B cells (along with MHC I). The antigen-binding cleft of MHC I is formed by domains α1 and α2. The antigenbindingcleft of MHC II is formed by domains α1 and β1.• Compare the structures of the MHC I and MHC II molecules.Antigen-Presenting Cells (APCs)All nucleated cells in the body have mechanisms for processing and presenting antigens in association with MHCmolecules. This signals the immune system, indicating whether the cell is normal and healthy or infected with anintracellular pathogen. However, only macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells have the ability to present antigensspecifically for the purpose of activating T cells; for this reason, these types of cells are sometimes referred to asantigen-presenting cells (APCs).While all APCs play a similar role in adaptive immunity, there are some important differences to consider.Macrophages and dendritic cells are phagocytes that ingest and kill pathogens that penetrate the first-line barriers (i.e.,skin and mucous membranes). B cells, on the other hand, do not function as phagocytes but play a primary role inChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 787the production and secretion of antibodies. In addition, whereas macrophages and dendritic cells recognize pathogensthrough nonspecific receptor interactions (e.g., PAMPs, toll-like receptors, and receptors for opsonizing complementor antibody), B cells interact with foreign pathogens or their free antigens using antigen-specific immunoglobulin asreceptors (monomeric IgD and IgM). When the immunoglobulin receptors bind to an antigen, the B cell internalizesthe antigen by endocytosis before processing and presentting the antigen to T cells.Antigen Presentation with MHC II MoleculesMHC II molecules are only found on the surface of APCs. Macrophages and dendritic cells use similar mechanismsfor processing and presentation of antigens and their epitopes in association with MHC II; B cells use somewhatdifferent mechanisms that will be described further in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity. For now, wewill focus on the steps of the process as they pertain to dendritic cells.After a dendritic cell recognizes and attaches to a pathogen cell, the pathogen is internalized by phagocytosis and isinitially contained within a phagosome. Lysosomes containing antimicrobial enzymes and chemicals fuse with thephagosome to create a phagolysosome, where degradation of the pathogen for antigen processing begins. Proteases(protein-degrading) are especially important in antigen processing because only protein antigen epitopes are presentedto T cells by MHC II (Figure 18.12).APCs do not present all possible epitopes to T cells; only a selection of the most antigenic or immunodominantepitopes are presented. The mechanism by which epitopes are selected for processing and presentation by an APCis complicated and not well understood; however, once the most antigenic, immunodominant epitopes have beenprocessed, they associate within the antigen-binding cleft of MHC II molecules and are translocated to the cell surfaceof the dendritic cell for presentation to T cells.Figure 18.12 A dendritic cell phagocytoses a bacterial cell and brings it into a phagosome. Lysosomes fuse with thephagosome to create a phagolysosome, where antimicrobial chemicals and enzymes degrade the bacterial cell.Proteases process bacterial antigens, and the most antigenic epitopes are selected and presented on the cell’ssurface in conjunction with MHC II molecules. T cells recognize the presented antigens and are thus activated.788 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What are the three kinds of APCs?• What role to MHC II molecules play in antigen presentation?• What is the role of antigen presentation in adaptive immunity?Antigen Presentation with MHC I MoleculesMHC I molecules, found on all normal, healthy, nucleated cells, signal to the immune system that the cell is anormal “self” cell. In a healthy cell, proteins normally found in the cytoplasm are degraded by proteasomes (enzymecomplexes responsible for degradation and processing of proteins) and processed into self-antigen epitopes; theseself-antigen epitopes bind within the MHC I antigen-binding cleft and are then presented on the cell surface. Immunecells, such as NK cells, recognize these self-antigens and do not target the cell for destruction. However, if a cellbecomes infected with an intracellular pathogen (e.g., a virus), protein antigens specific to the pathogen are processedin the proteasomes and bind with MHC I molecules for presentation on the cell surface. This presentation of pathogenspecificantigens with MHC I signals that the infected cell must be targeted for destruction along with the pathogen.Before elimination of infected cells can begin, APCs must first activate the T cells involved in cellular immunity. Ifan intracellular pathogen directly infects the cytoplasm of an APC, then the processing and presentation of antigenscan occur as described (in proteasomes and on the cell surface with MHC I). However, if the intracellular pathogendoes not directly infect APCs, an alternative strategy called cross-presentation is utilized. In cross-presentation,antigens are brought into the APC by mechanisms normally leading to presentation with MHC II (i.e., throughphagocytosis), but the antigen is presented on an MHC I molecule for CD8 T cells. The exact mechanisms by whichcross-presentation occur are not yet well understood, but it appears that cross-presentation is primarily a function ofdendritic cells and not macrophages or B cells.• Compare and contrast antigen processing and presentation associated with MHC I and MHC II molecules.• What is cross-presentation, and when is it likely to occur?18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular ImmunityLearning Objectives• Describe the process of T-cell maturation and thymic selection• Explain the genetic events that lead to diversity of T-cell receptors• Compare and contrast the various classes and subtypes of T cells in terms of activation and function• Explain the mechanism by which superantigens effect unregulated T-cell activationAs explained in Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity, the antibodies involved in humoral immunity oftenbind pathogens and toxins before they can attach to and invade host cells. Thus, humoral immunity is primarilyconcerned with fighting pathogens in extracellular spaces. However, pathogens that have already gained entry to hostcells are largely protected from the humoral antibody-mediated defenses. Cellular immunity, on the other hand, targetsand eliminates intracellular pathogens through the actions of T lymphocytes, or T cells (Figure 18.13). T cells alsoplay a more central role in orchestrating the overall adaptive immune response (humoral as well as cellular) alongwith the cellular defenses of innate immunity.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 789Figure 18.13 This scanning electron micrograph shows a T lymphocyte, which is responsible for the cell-mediatedimmune response. The spike-like membrane structures increase surface area, allowing for greater interaction withother cell types and their signals. (credit: modification of work by NCI)T Cell Production and MaturationT cells, like all other white blood cells involved in innate and adaptive immunity, are formed from multipotenthematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow (see Figure 17.12). However, unlike the white blood cellsof innate immunity, eventual T cells differentiate first into lymphoid stem cells that then become small, immaturelymphocytes, sometimes called lymphoblasts. The first steps of differentiation occur in the red marrow of bones(Figure 18.14), after which immature T lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to the thymus for the finalsteps of maturation (Figure 18.15). Once in the thymus, the immature T lymphocytes are referred to as thymocytes.The maturation of thymocytes within the thymus can be divided into tree critical steps of positive and negativeselection, collectively referred to as thymic selection. The first step of thymic selection occurs in the cortex of thethymus and involves the development of a functional T-cell receptor (TCR) that is required for activation by APCs.Thymocytes with defective TCRs are removed by negative selection through the induction of apoptosis (programmedcontrolled cell death). The second step of thymic selection also occurs in the cortex and involves the positive selectionof thymocytes that will interact appropriately with MHC molecules. Thymocytes that can interact appropriately withMHC molecules receive a positive stimulation that moves them further through the process of maturation, whereasthymocytes that do not interact appropriately are not stimulated and are eliminated by apoptosis. The third andfinal step of thymic selection occurs in both the cortex and medulla and involves negative selection to remove selfreactingthymocytes, those that react to self-antigens, by apoptosis. This final step is sometimes referred to as centraltolerance because it prevents self-reacting T cells from reaching the bloodstream and potentially causing autoimmunedisease, which occurs when the immune system attacks healthy “self” cells.Despite central tolerance, some self-reactive T cells generally escape the thymus and enter the peripheral bloodstream.Therefore, a second line of defense called peripheral tolerance is needed to protect against autoimmune disease.Peripheral tolerance involves mechanisms of anergy and inhibition of self-reactive T cells by regulatory T cells.Anergy refers to a state of nonresponsiveness to antigen stimulation. In the case of self-reactive T cells that escapethe thymus, lack of an essential co-stimulatory signal required for activation causes anergy and prevents autoimmuneactivation. Regulatory T cells participate in peripheral tolerance by inhibiting the activation and function of selfreactiveT cells and by secreting anti-inflammatory cytokines.It is not completely understood what events specifically direct maturation of thymocytes into regulatory T cells.Current theories suggest the critical events may occur during the third step of thymic selection, when most self-790 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5reactive T cells are eliminated. Regulatory T cells may receive a unique signal that is below the threshold requiredto target them for negative selection and apoptosis. Consequently, these cells continue to mature and then exit thethymus, armed to inhibit the activation of self-reactive T cells.It has been estimated that the three steps of thymic selection eliminate 98% of thymocytes. The remaining 2% thatexit the thymus migrate through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to sites of secondary lymphoid organs/tissues,such as the lymph nodes, spleen, and tonsils (Figure 18.15), where they await activation through the presentation ofspecific antigens by APCs. Until they are activated, they are known as mature naïve T cells.Figure 18.14 (a) Red bone marrow can be found in the head of the femur (thighbone) and is also present in the flatbones of the body, such as the ilium and the scapula. (b) Red bone marrow is the site of production and differentiationof many formed elements of blood, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. The yellow bone marrow ispopulated primarily with adipose cells.Figure 18.15 The thymus is a bi-lobed, H-shaped glandular organ that is located just above the heart. It issurrounded by a fibrous capsule of connective tissue. The darkly staining cortex and the lighter staining medulla ofindividual lobules are clearly visible in the light micrograph of the thymus of a newborn (top right, LM × 100). (creditmicrograph: modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 791• What anatomical sites are involved in T cell production and maturation?• What are the three steps involved in thymic selection?• Why are central tolerance and peripheral tolerance important? What do they prevent?Classes of T CellsT cells can be categorized into three distinct classes: helper T cells, regulatory T cells, and cytotoxic T cells. Theseclasses are differentiated based on their expression of certain surface molecules, their mode of activation, and theirfunctional roles in adaptive immunity (Table 18.1).All T cells produce cluster of differentiation (CD) molecules, cell surface glycoproteins that can be used toidentify and distinguish between the various types of white blood cells. Although T cells can produce a variety ofCD molecules, CD4 and CD8 are the two most important used for differentiation of the classes. Helper T cellsand regulatory T cells are characterized by the expression of CD4 on their surface, whereas cytotoxic T cells arecharacterized by the expression of CD8.Classes of T cells can also be distinguished by the specific MHC molecules and APCs with which they interact foractivation. Helper T cells and regulatory T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting antigens associated withMHC II. In contrast, cytotoxic T cells recognize antigens presented in association with MHC I, either by APCs or bynucleated cells infected with an intracellular pathogen.The different classes of T cells also play different functional roles in the immune system. Helper T cells serve asthe central orchestrators that help activate and direct functions of humoral and cellular immunity. In addition, helperT cells enhance the pathogen-killing functions of macrophages and NK cells of innate immunity. In contrast, theprimary role of regulatory T cells is to prevent undesirable and potentially damaging immune responses. Their rolein peripheral tolerance, for example, protects against autoimmune disorders, as discussed earlier. Finally, cytotoxic Tcells are the primary effector cells for cellular immunity. They recognize and target cells that have been infected byintracellular pathogens, destroying infected cells along with the pathogens inside.Classes of T CellsClass SurfaceCDMoleculesActivation FunctionsOrchestrate humoral and cellularimmunityHelper TcellsCD4 APCs presenting antigens associatedwith MHC IIInvolved in the activation ofmacrophages and NK cellsRegulatoryT cellsCD4 APCs presenting antigens associatedwith MHC IIInvolved in peripheral tolerance andprevention of autoimmune responsesCytotoxicT cellsCD8 APCs or infected nucleated cellspresenting antigens associated withMHC IDestroy cells infected with intracellularpathogensTable 18.1792 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What are the unique functions of the three classes of T cells?• Which T cells can be activated by antigens presented by cells other than APCs?T-Cell ReceptorsFor both helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, activation is a complex process that requires the interactions of multiplemolecules and exposure to cytokines. The T-cell receptor (TCR) is involved in the first step of pathogen epitoperecognition during the activation process.The TCR comes from the same receptor family as the antibodies IgD and IgM, the antigen receptors on the Bcell membrane surface, and thus shares common structural elements. Similar to antibodies, the TCR has a variableregion and a constant region, and the variable region provides the antigen-binding site (Figure 18.16). However,the structure of TCR is smaller and less complex than the immunoglobulin molecules (Figure 18.5). Whereasimmunoglobulins have four peptide chains and Y-shaped structures, the TCR consists of just two peptide chains (αand β chains), both of which span the cytoplasmic membrane of the T cell.TCRs are epitope-specific, and it has been estimated that 25 million T cells with unique epitope-binding TCRs arerequired to protect an individual against a wide range of microbial pathogens. Because the human genome onlycontains about 25,000 genes, we know that each specific TCR cannot be encoded by its own set of genes. This raisesthe question of how such a vast population of T cells with millions of specific TCRs can be achieved. The answer isa process called genetic rearrangement, which occurs in the thymus during the first step of thymic selection.The genes that code for the variable regions of the TCR are divided into distinct gene segments called variable (V),diversity (D), and joining (J) segments. The genes segments associated with the α chain of the TCR consist 70 ormore different Vα segments and 61 different Jα segments. The gene segments associated with the β chain of the TCRconsist of 52 different Vβ segments, two different Dβ segments, and 13 different Jβ segments. During the developmentof the functional TCR in the thymus, genetic rearrangement in a T cell brings together one Vα segment and one Jαsegment to code for the variable region of the α chain. Similarly, genetic rearrangement brings one of the Vβ segmentstogether with one of the Dβ segments and one of thetJβ segments to code for the variable region of the β chain. Allthe possible combinations of rearrangements between different segments of V, D, and J provide the genetic diversityrequired to produce millions of TCRs with unique epitope-specific variable regions.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 793Figure 18.16 A T-cell receptor spans the cytoplasmic membrane and projects variable binding regions into theextracellular space to bind processed antigens associated with MHC I or MHC II molecules.• What are the similarities and differences between TCRs and immunoglobulins?• What process is used to provide millions of unique TCR binding sites?Activation and Differentiation of Helper T CellsHelper T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting processed foreign epitopes in association with MHC II. Thefirst step in the activation process is TCR recognition of the specific foreign epitope presented within the MHC IIantigen-binding cleft. The second step involves the interaction of CD4 on the helper T cell with a region of the MHCII molecule separate from the antigen-binding cleft. This second interaction anchors the MHC II-TCR complex andensures that the helper T cell is recognizing both the foreign (“nonself”) epitope and “self” antigen of the APC; bothrecognitions are required for activation of the cell. In the third step, the APC and T cell secrete cytokines that activatethe helper T cell. The activated helper T cell then proliferates, dividing by mitosis to produce clonal naïve helper Tcells that differentiate into subtypes with different functions (Figure 18.17).794 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.17 This illustration depicts the activation of a naïve (unactivated) helper T cell by an antigen-presentingcell and the subsequent proliferation and differentiation of the activated T cell into different subtypes.Activated helper T cells can differentiate into one of four distinct subtypes, summarized in Table 18.2. Thedifferentiation process is directed by APC-secreted cytokines. Depending on which APC-secreted cytokines interactwith an activated helper T cell, the cell may differentiate into a T helper 1 (TH1) cell, a T helper 2 (TH2) cell, ora memory helper T cell. The two types of helper T cells are relatively short-lived effector cells, meaning that theyperform various functions of the immediate immune response. In contrast, memory helper T cells are relatively longlived; they are programmed to “remember” a specific antigen or epitope in order to mount a rapid, strong, secondaryresponse to subsequent exposures.TH1 cells secrete their own cytokines that are involved in stimulating and orchestrating other cells involved inadaptive and innate immunity. For example, they stimulate cytotoxic T cells, enhancing their killing of infected cellsand promoting differentiation into memory cytotoxic T cells. TH1 cells also stimulate macrophages and neutrophilsto become more effective in their killing of intracellular bacteria. They can also stimulate NK cells to become moreeffective at killing target cells.TH2 cells play an important role in orchestrating the humoral immune response through their secretion of cytokinesthat activate B cells and direct B cell differentiation and antibody production. Various cytokines produced by TH2cells orchestrate antibody class switching, which allows B cells to switch between the production of IgM, IgG,IgA, and IgE as needed to carry out specific antibody functions and to provide pathogen-specific humoral immuneresponses.A third subtype of helper T cells called TH17 cells was discovered through observations that immunity to someinfections is not associated with TH1 or TH2 cells. TH17 cells and the cytokines they produce appear to be specificallyresponsible for the body’s defense against chronic mucocutaneous infections. Patients who lack sufficient TH17 cellsin the mucosa (e.g., HIV patients) may be more susceptible to bacteremia and gastrointestinal infections.[1]1. Blaschitz C., Raffatellu M. “Th17 cytokines and the gut mucosal barrier.” J Clin Immunol. 2010 Mar; 30(2):196-203. doi: 10.1007/s10875-010-9368-7.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 795Subtypes of Helper T CellsSubtype FunctionsStimulate cytotoxic T cells and produce memory cytotoxic T cellsStimulate macrophages and neutrophils (PMNs) for more effective intracellular killing ofpathogensTH1 cellsStimulate NK cells to kill more effectivelyTH2 cells Stimulate B cell activation and differentiation into plasma cells and memory B cellsDirect antibody class switching in B cellsTH17 cells Stimulate immunity to specific infections such as chronic mucocutaneous infectionsMemory helper Tcells“Remember” a specific pathogen and mount a strong, rapid secondary response upon reexposureTable 18.2Activation and Differentiation of Cytotoxic T CellsCytotoxic T cells (also referred to as cytotoxic T lymphocytes, or CTLs) are activated by APCs in a three-step processsimilar to that of helper T cells. The key difference is that the activation of cytotoxic T cells involves recognitionof an antigen presented with MHC I (as opposed to MHC II) and interaction of CD8 (as opposed to CD4) with thereceptor complex. After the successful co-recognition of foreign epitope and self-antigen, the production of cytokinesby the APC and the cytotoxic T cell activate clonal proliferation and differentiation. Activated cytotoxic T cells candifferentiate into effector cytotoxic T cells that target pathogens for destruction or memory cells that are ready torespond to subsequent exposures.As noted, proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells is also stimulated by cytokines secreted from TH1 cellsactivated by the same foreign epitope. The co-stimulation that comes from these TH1 cells is provided by secretedcytokines. Although it is possible for activation of cytotoxic T cells to occur without stimulation from TH1 cells, theactivation is not as effective or long-lasting.Once activated, cytotoxic T cells serve as the effector cells of cellular immunity, recognizing and kill cells infectedwith intracellular pathogens through a mechanism very similar to that of NK cells. However, whereas NK cellsrecognize nonspecific signals of cell stress or abnormality, cytotoxic T cells recognize infected cells through antigenpresentation of pathogen-specific epitopes associated with MHC I. Once an infected cell is recognized, the TCR ofthe cytotoxic T cell binds to the epitope and releases perforin and granzymes that destroy the infected cell (Figure18.18). Perforin is a protein that creates pores in the target cell, and granzymes are proteases that enter the poresand induce apoptosis. This mechanism of programmed cell death is a controlled and efficient means of destroyingand removing infected cells without releasing the pathogens inside to infect neighboring cells, as might occur if theinfected cells were simply lysed.796 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.18 This figure illustrates the activation of a naïve (unactivated) cytotoxic T cell (CTL) by an antigenpresentingMHC I molecule on an infected body cell. Once activated, the CTL releases perforin and granzymes thatinvade the infected cell and induce controlled cell death, or apoptosis.In this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22cytoTcellapop) , you can see acytotoxic T cell inducing apoptosis in a target cell.• Compare and contrast the activation of helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells.• What are the different functions of helper T cell subtypes?• What is the mechanism of CTL-mediated destruction of infected cells?Superantigens and Unregulated Activation of T CellsWhen T cell activation is controlled and regulated, the result is a protective response that is effective in combatinginfections. However, if T cell activation is unregulated and excessive, the result can be a life-threatening. Certainbacterial and viral pathogens produce toxins known as superantigens (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial andViral Pathogens) that can trigger such an unregulated response. Known bacterial superantigens include toxic shocksyndrome toxin (TSST), staphylococcal enterotoxins, streptococcal pyrogenic toxins, streptococcal superantigen, andthe streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin. Viruses known to produce superantigens include Epstein-Barr virus (humanherpesvirus 4), cytomegalovirus (human herpesvirus 5), and others.Link to LearningChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 797The mechanism of T cell activation by superantigens involves their simultaneous binding to MHC II molecules ofAPCs and the variable region of the TCR β chain. This binding occurs outside of the antigen-binding cleft of MHC II,so the superantigen will bridge together and activate MHC II and TCR without specific foreign epitope recognition(Figure 18.19). The result is an excessive, uncontrolled release of cytokines, often called a cytokine storm, whichstimulates an excessive inflammatory response. This can lead to a dangerous decrease in blood pressure, shock, multiorganfailure, and potentially, death.Figure 18.19 (a) The macrophage in this figure is presenting a foreign epitope that does not match the TCR of the Tcell. Because the T cell does not recognize the epitope, it is not activated. (b) The macrophage in this figure ispresenting a superantigen that is not recognized by the TCR of the T cell, yet the superantigen still is able to bridgeand bind the MHC II and TCR molecules. This nonspecific, uncontrolled activation of the T cell results in an excessiverelease of cytokines that activate other T cells and cause excessive inflammation. (credit: modification of work by“Microbiotic”/YouTube)• What are examples of superantigens?• How does a superantigen activate a helper T cell?• What effect does a superantigen have on a T cell?SuperantigensMelissa, an otherwise healthy 22-year-old woman, is brought to the emergency room by her concernedboyfriend. She complains of a sudden onset of high fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle aches. In her initialinterview, she tells the attending physician that she is on hormonal birth control and also is two days into themenstruation portion of her cycle. She is on no other medications and is not abusing any drugs or alcohol. Sheis not a smoker. She is not diabetic and does not currently have an infection of any kind to her knowledge.While waiting in the emergency room, Melissa’s blood pressure begins to drop dramatically and her mentalstate deteriorates to general confusion. The physician believes she is likely suffering from toxic shocksyndrome (TSS). TSS is caused by the toxin TSST-1, a superantigen associated with Staphylococcus aureus,Case in Point798 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5and improper tampon use is a common cause of infections leading to TSS. The superantigen inappropriatelystimulates widespread T cell activation and excessive cytokine release, resulting in a massive and systemicinflammatory response that can be fatal.Vaginal or cervical swabs may be taken to confirm the presence of the microbe, but these tests are not criticalto perform based on Melissa’s symptoms and medical history. The physician prescribes rehydration, supportivetherapy, and antibiotics to stem the bacterial infection. She also prescribes drugs to increase Melissa’s bloodpressure. Melissa spends three days in the hospital undergoing treatment; in addition, her kidney function ismonitored because of the high risk of kidney failure associated with TSS. After 72 hours, Melissa is well enoughto be discharged to continue her recovery at home.• In what way would antibiotic therapy help to combat a superantigen?Part 2Olivia’s swollen lymph nodes, abdomen, and spleen suggest a strong immune response to a systemic infectionin progress. In addition, little Olivia is reluctant to turn her head and appears to be experiencing severe neckpain. The physician orders a complete blood count, blood culture, and lumbar puncture. The cerebrospinalfluid (CSF) obtained appears cloudy and is further evaluated by Gram stain assessment and culturing forpotential bacterial pathogens. The complete blood count indicates elevated numbers of white blood cells inOlivia’s bloodstream. The white blood cell increases are recorded at 28.5 K/μL (normal range: 6.0–17.5 K/μL).The neutrophil percentage was recorded as 60% (normal range: 23–45%). Glucose levels in the CSF wereregistered at 30 mg/100 mL (normal range: 50–80 mg/100 mL). The WBC count in the CSF was 1,163/mm3(normal range: 5–20/mm3).• Based on these results, do you have a preliminary diagnosis?• What is a recommended treatment based on this preliminary diagnosis?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral ImmunityLearning Objectives• Describe the production and maturation of B cells• Compare the structure of B-cell receptors and T-cell receptors• Compare T-dependent and T-independent activation of B cells• Compare the primary and secondary antibody responsesHumoral immunity refers to mechanisms of the adaptive immune defenses that are mediated by antibodies secreted byB lymphocytes, or B cells. This section will focus on B cells and discuss their production and maturation, receptors,and mechanisms of activation.B Cell Production and MaturationLike T cells, B cells are formed from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow and followa pathway through lymphoid stem cell and lymphoblast (see Figure 17.12). Unlike T cells, however, lymphoblastsClinical FocusChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 799destined to become B cells do not leave the bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation. Rather, eventual Bcells continue to mature in the bone marrow.The first step of B cell maturation is an assessment of the functionality of their antigen-binding receptors. This occursthrough positive selection for B cells with normal functional receptors. A mechanism of negative selection is thenused to eliminate self-reacting B cells and minimize the risk of autoimmunity. Negative selection of self-reacting Bcells can involve elimination by apoptosis, editing or modification of the receptors so they are no longer self-reactive,or induction of anergy in the B cell. Immature B cells that pass the selection in the bone marrow then travel to thespleen for their final stages of maturation. There they become naïve mature B cells, i.e., mature B cells that have notyet been activated.• Compare the maturation of B cells with the maturation of T cells.B-Cell ReceptorsLike T cells, B cells possess antigen-specific receptors with diverse specificities. Although they rely on T cells foroptimum function, B cells can be activated without help from T cells. B-cell receptors (BCRs) for naïve matureB cells are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM. They have two identical heavy chains and twoidentical light chains connected by disulfide bonds into a basic “Y” shape (Figure 18.20). The trunk of the Y-shapedmolecule, the constant region of the two heavy chains, spans the B cell membrane. The two antigen-binding sitesexposed to the exterior of the B cell are involved in the binding of specific pathogen epitopes to initiate the activationprocess. It is estimated that each naïve mature B cell has upwards of 100,000 BCRs on its membrane, and each ofthese BCRs has an identical epitope-binding specificity.In order to be prepared to react to a wide range of microbial epitopes, B cells, like T cells, use genetic rearrangementof hundreds of gene segments to provide the necessary diversity of receptor specificities. The variable region of theBCR heavy chain is made up of V, D, and J segments, similar to the β chain of the TCR. The variable region of theBCR light chain is made up of V and J segments, similar to the α chain of the TCR. Genetic rearrangement of allpossible combinations of V-J-D (heavy chain) and V-J (light chain) provides for millions of unique antigen-bindingsites for the BCR and for the antibodies secreted after activation.One important difference between BCRs and TCRs is the way they can interact with antigenic epitopes. WhereasTCRs can only interact with antigenic epitopes that are presented within the antigen-binding cleft of MHC I or MHCII, BCRs do not require antigen presentation with MHC; they can interact with epitopes on free antigens or withepitopes displayed on the surface of intact pathogens. Another important difference is that TCRs only recognizeprotein epitopes, whereas BCRs can recognize epitopes associated with different molecular classes (e.g., proteins,polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides).Activation of B cells occurs through different mechanisms depending on the molecular class of the antigen. Activationof a B cell by a protein antigen requires the B cell to function as an APC, presenting the protein epitopes with MHC IIto helper T cells. Because of their dependence on T cells for activation of B cells, protein antigens are classified as Tdependentantigens. In contrast, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and other nonprotein antigens are consideredT-independent antigens because they can activate B cells without antigen processing and presentation to T cells.800 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.20 B-cell receptors are embedded in the membranes of B cells. The variable regions of all of thereceptors on a single cell bind the same specific antigen.• What types of molecules serve as the BCR?• What are the differences between TCRs and BCRs with respect to antigen recognition?• Which molecule classes are T-dependent antigens and which are T-independent antigens?T Cell-Independent Activation of B cellsActivation of B cells without the cooperation of helper T cells is referred to as T cell-independent activation andoccurs when BCRs interact with T-independent antigens. T-independent antigens (e.g., polysaccharide capsules,lipopolysaccharide) have repetitive epitope units within their structure, and this repetition allows for the cross-linkageof multiple BCRs, providing the first signal for activation (Figure 18.21). Because T cells are not involved, thesecond signal has to come from other sources, such as interactions of toll-like receptors with PAMPs or interactionswith factors from the complement system.Once a B cell is activated, it undergoes clonal proliferation and daughter cells differentiate into plasma cells.Plasma cells are antibody factories that secrete large quantities of antibodies. After differentiation, the surface BCRsdisappear and the plasma cell secretes pentameric IgM molecules that have the same antigen specificity as the BCRs(Figure 18.21).The T cell-independent response is short-lived and does not result in the production of memory B cells. Thus it willnot result in a secondary response to subsequent exposures to T-independent antigens.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 801Figure 18.21 T-independent antigens have repeating epitopes that can induce B cell recognition and activationwithout involvement from T cells. A second signal, such as interaction of TLRs with PAMPs (not shown), is alsorequired for activation of the B cell. Once activated, the B cell proliferates and differentiates into antibody-secretingplasma cells.• What are the two signals required for T cell-independent activation of B cells?• What is the function of a plasma cell?T Cell-Dependent Activation of B cellsT cell-dependent activation of B cells is more complex than T cell-independent activation, but the resulting immuneresponse is stronger and develops memory. T cell-dependent activation can occur either in response to free proteinantigens or to protein antigens associated with an intact pathogen. Interaction between the BCRs on a naïve matureB cell and a free protein antigen stimulate internalization of the antigen, whereas interaction with antigens associatedwith an intact pathogen initiates the extraction of the antigen from the pathogen before internalization. Onceinternalized inside the B cell, the protein antigen is processed and presented with MHC II. The presented antigen isthen recognized by helper T cells specific to the same antigen. The TCR of the helper T cell recognizes the foreignantigen, and the T cell’s CD4 molecule interacts with MHC II on the B cell. The coordination between B cells andhelper T cells that are specific to the same antigen is referred to as linked recognition.Once activated by linked recognition, TH2 cells produce and secrete cytokines that activate the B cell and causeproliferation into clonal daughter cells. After several rounds of proliferation, additional cytokines provided by theTH2 cells stimulate the differentiation of activated B cell clones into memory B cells, which will quickly respondto subsequent exposures to the same protein epitope, and plasma cells that lose their membrane BCRs and initiallysecrete pentameric IgM (Figure 18.22).After initial secretion of IgM, cytokines secreted by TH2 cells stimulate the plasma cells to switch from IgMproduction to production of IgG, IgA, or IgE. This process, called class switching or isotype switching, allows plasmacells cloned from the same activated B cell to produce a variety of antibody classes with the same epitope specificity.Class switching is accomplished by genetic rearrangement of gene segments encoding the constant region, whichdetermines an antibody’s class. The variable region is not changed, so the new class of antibody retains the originalepitope specificity.802 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.22 In T cell-dependent activation of B cells, the B cell recognizes and internalizes an antigen andpresents it to a helper T cell that is specific to the same antigen. The helper T cell interacts with the antigen presentedby the B cell, which activates the T cell and stimulates the release of cytokines that then activate the B cell. Activationof the B cell triggers proliferation and differentiation into B cells and plasma cells.• What steps are required for T cell-dependent activation of B cells?• What is antibody class switching and why is it important?Primary and Secondary ResponsesT cell-dependent activation of B cells plays an important role in both the primary and secondary responses associatedwith adaptive immunity. With the first exposure to a protein antigen, a T cell-dependent primary antibody responseoccurs. The initial stage of the primary response is a lag period, or latent period, of approximately 10 days, duringwhich no antibody can be detected in serum. This lag period is the time required for all of the steps of the primaryChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 803response, including naïve mature B cell binding of antigen with BCRs, antigen processing and presentation, helper Tcell activation, B cell activation, and clonal proliferation. The end of the lag period is characterized by a rise in IgMlevels in the serum, as TH2 cells stimulate B cell differentiation into plasma cells. IgM levels reach their peak around14 days after primary antigen exposure; at about this same time, TH2 stimulates antibody class switching, and IgMlevels in serum begin to decline. Meanwhile, levels of IgG increase until they reach a peak about three weeks into theprimary response (Figure 18.23).During the primary response, some of the cloned B cells are differentiated into memory B cells programmed torespond to subsequent exposures. This secondary response occurs more quickly and forcefully than the primaryresponse. The lag period is decreased to only a few days and the production of IgG is significantly higher thanobserved for the primary response (Figure 18.23). In addition, the antibodies produced during the secondaryresponse are more effective and bind with higher affinity to the targeted epitopes. Plasma cells produced duringsecondary responses live longer than those produced during the primary response, so levels of specific antibodyremain elevated for a longer period of time.Figure 18.23 Compared to the primary response, the secondary antibody response occurs more quickly andproduces antibody levels that are higher and more sustained. The secondary response mostly involves IgG.• What events occur during the lag period of the primary antibody response?• Why do antibody levels remain elevated longer during the secondary antibody response?18.5 VaccinesLearning Objectives• Compare the various kinds of artificial immunity• Differentiate between variolation and vaccination• Describe different types of vaccines and explain their respective advantages and disadvantagesFor many diseases, prevention is the best form of treatment, and few strategies for disease prevention are as effective804 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5as vaccination. Vaccination is a form of artificial immunity. By artificially stimulating the adaptive immune defenses,a vaccine triggers memory cell production similar to that which would occur during a primary response. In so doing,the patient is able to mount a strong secondary response upon exposure to the pathogen—but without having to firstsuffer through an initial infection. In this section, we will explore several different kinds of artificial immunity alongwith various types of vaccines and the mechanisms by which they induce artificial immunity.Classifications of Adaptive ImmunityAll forms of adaptive immunity can be described as either active or passive. Active immunity refers to the activationof an individual’s own adaptive immune defenses, whereas passive immunity refers to the transfer of adaptiveimmune defenses from another individual or animal. Active and passive immunity can be further subdivided basedon whether the protection is acquired naturally or artificially.Natural active immunity is adaptive immunity that develops after natural exposure to a pathogen (Figure 18.24).Examples would include the lifelong immunity that develops after recovery from a chickenpox or measles infection(although an acute infection is not always necessary to activate adaptive immunity). The length of time that anindividual is protected can vary substantially depending upon the pathogen and antigens involved. For example,activation of adaptive immunity by protein spike structures during an intracellular viral infection can activate lifelongimmunity, whereas activation by carbohydrate capsule antigens during an extracellular bacterial infection mayactivate shorter-term immunity.Natural passive immunity involves the natural passage of antibodies from a mother to her child before and afterbirth. IgG is the only antibody class that can cross the placenta from mother’s blood to the fetal blood supply. Placentaltransfer of IgG is an important passive immune defense for the infant, lasting up to six months after birth. SecretoryIgA can also be transferred from mother to infant through breast milk.Artificial passive immunity refers to the transfer of antibodies produced by a donor (human or animal) to anotherindividual. This transfer of antibodies may be done as a prophylactic measure (i.e., to prevent disease after exposureto a pathogen) or as a strategy for treating an active infection. For example, artificial passive immunity is commonlyused for post-exposure prophylaxis against rabies, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and chickenpox (in high risk individuals).Active infections treated by artificial passive immunity include cytomegalovirus infections in immunocompromisedpatients and Ebola virus infections. In 1995, eight patients in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with active Ebolainfections were treated with blood transfusions from patients who were recovering from Ebola. Only one of the eightpatients died (a 12.5% mortality rate), which was much lower than the expected 80% mortality rate for Ebola inuntreated patients.[2] Artificial passive immunity is also used for the treatment of diseases caused by bacterial toxins,including tetanus, botulism, and diphtheria.Artificial active immunity is the foundation for vaccination. It involves the activation of adaptive immunity throughthe deliberate exposure of an individual to weakened or inactivated pathogens, or preparations consisting of keypathogen antigens.2. K. Mupapa, M. Massamba, K. Kibadi, K. Kivula, A. Bwaka, M. Kipasa, R. Colebunders, J. J. Muyembe-Tamfum. “Treatment of EbolaHemorrhagic Fever with Blood Transfusions from Convalescent Patients.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 179 Suppl. (1999): S18–S23.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 805Figure 18.24 The four classifications of immunity. (credit top left photo: modification of work by USDA; credit topright photo: modification of work by “Michaelberry”/Wikimedia; credit bottom left photo: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention; credit bottom right photo: modification of work by Friskila Silitonga,Indonesia, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the difference between active and passive immunity?• What kind of immunity is conferred by a vaccine?Herd ImmunityThe four kinds of immunity just described result from an individual’s adaptive immune system. For any givendisease, an individual may be considered immune or susceptible depending on his or her ability to mount an effectiveimmune response upon exposure. Thus, any given population is likely to have some individuals who are immune andother individuals who are susceptible. If a population has very few susceptible individuals, even those susceptibleindividuals will be protected by a phenomenon called herd immunity. Herd immunity has nothing to do with anindividual’s ability to mount an effective immune response; rather, it occurs because there are too few susceptibleindividuals in a population for the disease to spread effectively.Vaccination programs create herd immunity by greatly reducing the number of susceptible individuals in a population.Even if some individuals in the population are not vaccinated, as long as a certain percentage is immune (eithernaturally or artificially), the few susceptible individuals are unlikely to be exposed to the pathogen. However, becausenew individuals are constantly entering populations (for example, through birth or relocation), vaccination programsare necessary to maintain herd immunity.806 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Vaccination: Obligation or ChoiceA growing number of parents are choosing not to vaccinate their children. They are dubbed “antivaxxers,” andthe majority of them believe that vaccines are a cause of autism (or other disease conditions), a link that hasnow been thoroughly disproven. Others object to vaccines on religious or moral grounds (e.g., the argumentthat Gardasil vaccination against HPV may promote sexual promiscuity), on personal ethical grounds (e.g., aconscientious objection to any medical intervention), or on political grounds (e.g., the notion that mandatoryvaccinations are a violation of individual liberties).[3]It is believed that this growing number of unvaccinated individuals has led to new outbreaks of whooping coughand measles. We would expect that herd immunity would protect those unvaccinated in our population, butherd immunity can only be maintained if enough individuals are being vaccinated.Vaccination is clearly beneficial for public health. But from the individual parent’s perspective the view canbe murkier. Vaccines, like all medical interventions, have associated risks, and while the risks of vaccinationmay be extremely low compared to the risks of infection, parents may not always understand or accept theconsensus of the medical community. Do such parents have a right to withhold vaccination from their children?Should they be allowed to put their children—and society at large—at risk?Many governments insist on childhood vaccinations as a condition for entering public school, but it has becomeeasy in most states to opt out of the requirement or to keep children out of the public system. Since the 1970s,West Virginia and Mississippi have had in place a stringent requirement for childhood vaccination, withoutexceptions, and neither state has had a case of measles since the early 1990s. California lawmakers recentlypassed a similar law in response to a measles outbreak in 2015, making it much more difficult for parents toopt out of vaccines if their children are attending public schools. Given this track record and renewed legislativeefforts, should other states adopt similarly strict requirements?What role should health-care providers play in promoting or enforcing universal vaccination? Studies haveshown that many parents’ minds can be changed in response to information delivered by health-care workers,but is it the place of health-care workers to try to persuade parents to have their children vaccinated? Somehealth-care providers are understandably reluctant to treat unvaccinated patients. Do they have the right torefuse service to patients who decline vaccines? Do insurance companies have the right to deny coverage toantivaxxers? These are all ethical questions that policymakers may be forced to address as more parents skirtvaccination norms.Variolation and VaccinationThousands of years ago, it was first recognized that individuals who survived a smallpox infection were immune tosubsequent infections. The practice of inoculating individuals to actively protect them from smallpox appears to haveoriginated in the 10th century in China, when the practice of variolation was described (Figure 18.25). Variolationrefers to the deliberate inoculation of individuals with infectious material from scabs or pustules of smallpox victims.Infectious materials were either injected into the skin or introduced through the nasal route. The infection thatdeveloped was usually milder than naturally acquired smallpox, and recovery from the milder infection providedprotection against the more serious disease.Although the majority of individuals treated by variolation developed only mild infections, the practice was notwithout risks. More serious and sometimes fatal infections did occur, and because smallpox was contagious,Eye on Ethics3. Elizabeth Yale. “Why Anti-Vaccination Movements Can Never Be Tamed.” Religion & Politics, July 22, 2014.http://religionandpolitics.org/2014/07/22/why-anti-vaccination-movements-can-never-be-tamed.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 807infections resulting from variolation could lead to epidemics. Even so, the practice of variolation for smallpoxprevention spread to other regions, including India, Africa, and Europe.Figure 18.25 Variolation for smallpox originated in the Far East and the practice later spread to Europe and Africa.This Japanese relief depicts a patient receiving a smallpox variolation from the physician Ogata Shunsaku(1748–1810).Although variolation had been practiced for centuries, the English physician Edward Jenner (1749–1823) is generallycredited with developing the modern process of vaccination. Jenner observed that milkmaids who developed cowpox,a disease similar to smallpox but milder, were immune to the more serious smallpox. This led Jenner to hypothesizethat exposure to a less virulent pathogen could provide immune protection against a more virulent pathogen, providinga safer alternative to variolation. In 1796, Jenner tested his hypothesis by obtaining infectious samples from amilkmaid’s active cowpox lesion and injecting the materials into a young boy (Figure 18.26). The boy developed amild infection that included a low-grade fever, discomfort in his axillae (armpit) and loss of appetite. When the boywas later infected with infectious samples from smallpox lesions, he did not contract smallpox.[4] This new approachwas termed vaccination, a name deriving from the use of cowpox (Latin vacca meaning “cow”) to protect againstsmallpox. Today, we know that Jenner’s vaccine worked because the cowpox virus is genetically and antigenicallyrelated to the Variola viruses that caused smallpox. Exposure to cowpox antigens resulted in a primary response andthe production of memory cells that identical or related epitopes of Variola virus upon a later exposure to smallpox.The success of Jenner’s smallpox vaccination led other scientists to develop vaccines for other diseases. Perhaps themost notable was Louis Pasteur, who developed vaccines for rabies, cholera, and anthrax. During the 20th and 21stcenturies, effective vaccines were developed to prevent a wide range of diseases caused by viruses (e.g., chickenpoxand shingles, hepatitis, measles, mumps, polio, and yellow fever) and bacteria (e.g., diphtheria, pneumococcalpneumonia, tetanus, and whooping cough,).4. N. J. Willis. “Edward Jenner and the Eradication of Smallpox.” Scottish Medical Journal 42 (1997): 118–121.808 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 18.26 (a) A painting of Edward Jenner depicts a cow and a milkmaid in the background. (b) Lesions on apatient infected with cowpox, a zoonotic disease caused by a virus closely related to the one that causes smallpox.(credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the difference between variolation and vaccination for smallpox?• Explain why vaccination is less risky than variolation.Classes of VaccinesFor a vaccine to provide protection against a disease, it must expose an individual to pathogen-specific antigensthat will stimulate a protective adaptive immune response. By its very nature, this entails some risk. As with anypharmaceutical drug, vaccines have the potential to cause adverse effects. However, the ideal vaccine causes no severeadverse effects and poses no risk of contracting the disease that it is intended to prevent. Various types of vaccineshave been developed with these goals in mind. These different classes of vaccines are described in the next sectionand summarized in Table 18.3.Live Attenuated VaccinesLive attenuated vaccines expose an individual to a weakened strain of a pathogen with the goal of establishinga subclinical infection that will activate the adaptive immune defenses. Pathogens are attenuated to decrease theirvirulence using methods such as genetic manipulation (to eliminate key virulence factors) or long-term culturing inan unnatural host or environment (to promote mutations and decrease virulence).By establishing an active infection, live attenuated vaccines stimulate a more comprehensive immune response thansome other types of vaccines. Live attenuated vaccines activate both cellular and humoral immunity and stimulate thedevelopment of memory for long-lasting immunity. In some cases, vaccination of one individual with a live attenuatedpathogen can even lead to natural transmission of the attenuated pathogen to other individuals. This can cause theother individuals to also develop an active, subclinical infection that activates their adaptive immune defenses.Disadvantages associated with live attenuated vaccines include the challenges associated with long-term storage andtransport as well as the potential for a patient to develop signs and symptoms of disease during the active infection(particularly in immunocompromised patients). There is also a risk of the attenuated pathogen reverting back to fullvirulence. Table 18.3 lists examples live attenuated vaccines.Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 809Inactivated VaccinesInactivated vaccines contain whole pathogens that have been killed or inactivated with heat, chemicals, or radiation.For inactivated vaccines to be effective, the inactivation process must not affect the structure of key antigens on thepathogen.Because the pathogen is killed or inactive, inactivated vaccines do not produce an active infection, and the resultingimmune response is weaker and less comprehensive than that provoked by a live attenuated vaccine. Typically theresponse involves only humoral immunity, and the pathogen cannot be transmitted to other individuals. In addition,inactivated vaccines usually require higher doses and multiple boosters, possibly causing inflammatory reactions atthe site of injection.Despite these disadvantages, inactivated vaccines do have the advantages of long-term storage stability and ease oftransport. Also, there is no risk of causing severe active infections. However, inactivated vaccines are not withouttheir side effects. Table 18.3 lists examples of inactivated vaccines.Subunit VaccinesWhereas live attenuated and inactive vaccines expose an individual to a weakened or dead pathogen, subunitvaccines only expose the patient to the key antigens of a pathogen—not whole cells or viruses. Subunit vaccines canbe produced either by chemically degrading a pathogen and isolating its key antigens or by producing the antigensthrough genetic engineering. Because these vaccines contain only the essential antigens of a pathogen, the risk of sideeffects is relatively low. Table 18.3 lists examples of subunit vaccines.Toxoid VaccinesLike subunit vaccines, toxoid vaccines do not introduce a whole pathogen to the patient; they contain inactivatedbacterial toxins, called toxoids. Toxoid vaccines are used to prevent diseases in which bacterial toxins play animportant role in pathogenesis. These vaccines activate humoral immunity that neutralizes the toxins. Table 18.3lists examples of toxoid vaccines.Conjugate VaccinesA conjugate vaccine is a type of subunit vaccine that consists of a protein conjugated to a capsule polysaccharide.Conjugate vaccines have been developed to enhance the efficacy of subunit vaccines against pathogens that haveprotective polysaccharide capsules that help them evade phagocytosis, causing invasive infections that can leadto meningitis and other serious conditions. The subunit vaccines against these pathogens introduce T-independentcapsular polysaccharide antigens that result in the production of antibodies that can opsonize the capsule and thuscombat the infection; however, children under the age of two years do not respond effectively to these vaccines.Children do respond effectively when vaccinated with the conjugate vaccine, in which a protein with T-dependentantigens is conjugated to the capsule polysaccharide. The conjugated protein-polysaccharide antigen stimulatesproduction of antibodies against both the protein and the capsule polysaccharide. Table 18.3 lists examples ofconjugate vaccines.Classes of VaccinesClass Description Advantages Disadvantages ExamplesCellular andhumoralimmunityDifficult to store andtransportLiveattenuatedWeakened strain ofwhole pathogenLong-lastingimmunityRisk of infection inimmunocompromisedpatientsChickenpox, German measles,measles, mumps, tuberculosis,typhoid fever, yellow feverTable 18.3810 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Classes of VaccinesClass Description Advantages Disadvantages ExamplesTransmissionto contactsRisk of reversionEase ofstorage andtransportWeaker immunity(humoral only)Inactivated Whole pathogenkilled or inactivatedwith heat,chemicals, orradiation No risk ofsevere activeinfectionHigher doses andmore boostersrequiredCholera, hepatitis A, influenza,plague, rabiesLimited longevityMultiple dosesrequiredSubunit ImmunogenicantigensLower risk ofside effectsNo protection againstantigenic variationAnthrax, hepatitis B, influenza,meningitis, papillomavirus,pneumococcal pneumonia,whooping coughToxoid Inactivated bacterialtoxinHumoralimmunity toneutralizetoxinDoes not preventinfectionBotulism, diphtheria, pertussis,tetanusT-dependent Costly to produceresponse tocapsule No protection againstantigenic variationConjugate Capsulepolysaccharideconjugated toproteinBetterresponse inyoungchildrenMay interfere withother vaccinesMeningitis(Haemophilus influenzae,Streptococcus pneumoniae,Neisseria meningitides)Table 18.3• What is the risk associated with a live attenuated vaccine?• Why is a conjugated vaccine necessary in some cases?DNA VaccinesDNA vaccines represent a relatively new and promising approach to vaccination. A DNA vaccine is producedby incorporating genes for antigens into a recombinant plasmid vaccine. Introduction of the DNA vaccine intoa patient leads to uptake of the recombinant plasmid by some of the patient’s cells, followed by transcriptionand translation of antigens and presentation of these antigens with MHC I to activate adaptive immunity. Thisresults in the stimulation of both humoral and cellular immunity without the risk of active disease associatedwith live attenuated vaccines.Micro ConnectionsChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 811Although most DNA vaccines for humans are still in development, it is likely that they will become moreprevalent in the near future as researchers are working on engineering DNA vaccines that will activate adaptiveimmunity against several different pathogens at once. First-generation DNA vaccines tested in the 1990slooked promising in animal models but were disappointing when tested in human subjects. Poor cellular uptakeof the DNA plasmids was one of the major problems impacting their efficacy. Trials of second-generation DNAvaccines have been more promising thanks to new techniques for enhancing cellular uptake and optimizingantigens. DNA vaccines for various cancers and viral pathogens such as HIV, HPV, and hepatitis B and C arecurrently in development.Some DNA vaccines are already in use. In 2005, a DNA vaccine against West Nile virus was approved foruse in horses in the United States. Canada has also approved a DNA vaccine to protect fish from infectioushematopoietic necrosis virus.[5] A DNA vaccine against Japanese encephalitis virus was approved for use inhumans in 2010 in Australia.[6]ResolutionBased on Olivia’s symptoms, her physician made a preliminary diagnosis of bacterial meningitis without waitingfor positive identification from the blood and CSF samples sent to the lab. Olivia was admitted to the hospitaland treated with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics and rehydration therapy. Over the next several days,her condition began to improve, and new blood samples and lumbar puncture samples showed an absenceof microbes in the blood and CSF with levels of white blood cells returning to normal. During this time, the labproduced a positive identification of Neisseria meningitidis, the causative agent of meningococcal meningitis,in her original CSF sample.N. meningitidis produces a polysaccharide capsule that serves as a virulence factor. N. meningitidis tends toaffect infants after they begin to lose the natural passive immunity provided by maternal antibodies. At one yearof age, Olivia’s maternal IgG antibodies would have disappeared, and she would not have developed memorycells capable of recognizing antigens associated with the polysaccharide capsule of the N. meningitidis. Asa result, her adaptive immune system was unable to produce protective antibodies to combat the infection,and without antibiotics she may not have survived. Olivia’s infection likely would have been avoided altogetherhad she been vaccinated. A conjugate vaccine to prevent meningococcal meningitis is available and approvedfor infants as young as two months of age. However, current vaccination schedules in the United Statesrecommend that the vaccine be administered at age 11–12 with a booster at age 16.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus5. M. Alonso and J. C. Leong. “Licensed DNA Vaccines Against Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (IHNV).” Recent Patents onDNA & Gene Sequences (Discontinued) 7 no. 1 (2013): 62–65, issn 1872-2156/2212-3431. doi 10.2174/1872215611307010009.6. S.B. Halstead and S. J. Thomas. “New Japanese Encephalitis Vaccines: Alternatives to Production in Mouse Brain.” Expert Review ofVaccines 10 no. 3 (2011): 355–64.812 Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5In countries with developed public health systems, many vaccines are routinelyadministered to children and adults. Vaccine schedules are changed periodically,based on new information and research results gathered by public healthagencies. In the United States, the CDC publishes schedules and otherupdated information (https://www.openstax.org/l/22CDCVacSched) aboutvaccines.Summary18.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity• Adaptive immunity is an acquired defense against foreign pathogens that is characterized by specificity andmemory. The first exposure to an antigen stimulates a primary response, and subsequent exposures stimulatea faster and strong secondary response.• Adaptive immunity is a dual system involving humoral immunity (antibodies produced by B cells) andcellular immunity (T cells directed against intracellular pathogens).• Antigens, also called immunogens, are molecules that activate adaptive immunity. A single antigen possessessmaller epitopes, each capable of inducing a specific adaptive immune response.• An antigen’s ability to stimulate an immune response depends on several factors, including its molecular class,molecular complexity, and size.• Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are Y-shaped glycoproteins with two Fab sites for binding antigens and an Fcportion involved in complement activation and opsonization.• The five classes of antibody are IgM, IgG, IgA, IgE, and IgD, each differing in size, arrangement, locationwithin the body, and function. The five primary functions of antibodies are neutralization, opsonization,agglutination, complement activation, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and Antigen-Presenting Cells• Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a collection of genes coding for glycoprotein moleculesexpressed on the surface of all nucleated cells.• MHC I molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells and are essential for presentation of normal “self”antigens. Cells that become infected by intracellular pathogens can present foreign antigens on MHC I as well,marking the infected cell for destruction.• MHC II molecules are expressed only on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (macrophages, dendriticcells, and B cells). Antigen presentation with MHC II is essential for the activation of T cells.• Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) primarily ingest pathogens by phagocytosis, destroy them in thephagolysosomes, process the protein antigens, and select the most antigenic/immunodominant epitopes withMHC II for presentation to T cells.• Cross-presentation is a mechanism of antigen presentation and T-cell activation used by dendritic cells notdirectly infected by the pathogen; it involves phagocytosis of the pathogen but presentation on MHC I ratherthan MHC II.18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular Immunity• Immature T lymphocytes are produced in the red bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation.• Thymic selection is a three-step process of negative and positive selection that determines which T cells willmature and exit the thymus into the peripheral bloodstream.• Central tolerance involves negative selection of self-reactive T cells in the thymus, and peripheral toleranceLink to LearningChapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses 813involves anergy and regulatory T cells that prevent self-reactive immune responses and autoimmunity.• The TCR is similar in structure to immunoglobulins, but less complex. Millions of unique epitope-bindingTCRs are encoded through a process of genetic rearrangement of V, D, and J gene segments.• T cells can be divided into three classes—helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells, and regulatory T cells—basedon their expression of CD4 or CD8, the MHC molecules with which they interact for activation, and theirrespective functions.• Activated helper T cells differentiate into TH1, TH2, TH17, or memory T cell subtypes. Differentiation isdirected by the specific cytokines to which they are exposed. TH1, TH2, and TH17 perform different functionsrelated to stimulation of adaptive and innate immune defenses. Memory T cells are long-lived cells that canrespond quickly to secondary exposures.• Once activated, cytotoxic T cells target and kill cells infected with intracellular pathogens. Killing requiresrecognition of specific pathogen epitopes presented on the cell surface using MHC I molecules. Killing ismediated by perforin and granzymes that induce apoptosis.• Superantigens are bacterial or viral proteins that cause a nonspecific activation of helper T cells, leading toan excessive release of cytokines (cytokine storm) and a systemic, potentially fatal inflammatory response.18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity• B lymphocytes or B cells produce antibodies involved in humoral immunity. B cells are produced in the bonemarrow, where the initial stages of maturation occur, and travel to the spleen for final steps of maturation intonaïve mature B cells.• B-cell receptors (BCRs) are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM that bind specific antigenepitopes with their Fab antigen-binding regions. Diversity of antigen binding specificity is created by geneticrearrangement of V, D, and J segments similar to the mechanism used for TCR diversity.• Protein antigens are called T-dependent antigens because they can only activate B cells with the cooperationof helper T cells. Other molecule classes do not require T cell cooperation and are called T-independentantigens.• T cell-independent activation of B cells involves cross-linkage of BCRs by repetitive nonprotein antigenepitopes. It is characterized by the production of IgM by plasma cells and does not produce memory B cells.• T cell-dependent activation of B cells involves processing and presentation of protein antigens to helper Tcells, activation of the B cells by cytokines secreted from activated TH2 cells, and plasma cells that producedifferent classes of antibodies as a result of class switching. Memory B cells are also produced.• Secondary exposures to T-dependent antigens result in a secondary antibody response initiated by memoryB cells. The secondary response develops more quickly and produces higher and more sustained levels ofantibody with higher affinity for the specific antigen.18.5 Vaccines• Adaptive immunity can be divided into four distinct classifications: natural active immunity, naturalpassive immunity, artificial passive immunity, and artificial active immunity.• Artificial active immunity is the foundation for vaccination and vaccine development. Vaccination programsnot only confer artificial immunity on individuals, but also foster herd immunity in populations.• Variolation against smallpox originated in the 10th century in China, but the procedure was risky becauseit could cause the disease it was intended to prevent. Modern vaccination was developed by Edward Jenner,who developed the practice of inoculating patients with infectious materials from cowpox lesions to preventsmallpox.• Live attenuated vaccines and inactivated vaccines contain whole pathogens that are weak, killed, orinactivated. Subunit vaccines, toxoid vaccines, and conjugate vaccines contain acellular components withantigens that stimulate an immune response.