Chapter 8Microbial MetabolismFigure 8.1 Prokaryotes have great metabolic diversity with important consequences to other forms of life. Acidicmine drainage (left) is a serious environmental problem resulting from the introduction of water and oxygen to sulfideoxidizingbacteria during mining processes. These bacteria produce large amounts of sulfuric acid as a byproduct oftheir metabolism, resulting in a low-pH environment that can kill many aquatic plants and animals. On the other hand,some prokaryotes are essential to other life forms. Root nodules of many plants (right) house nitrogen-fixing bacteriathat convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, providing a usable nitrogen source for these plants. (credit left:modification of work by D. Hardesty, USGS Columbia Environment Research Center; credit right: modification of workby Celmow SR, Clairmont L, Madsen LH, and Guinel FC)Chapter Outline8.1 Energy, Matter, and Enzymes8.2 Catabolism of Carbohydrates8.3 Cellular Respiration8.4 Fermentation8.5 Catabolism of Lipids and Proteins8.6 Photosynthesis8.7 Biogeochemical CyclesIntroductionThroughout earth’s history, microbial metabolism has been a driving force behind the development and maintenanceof the planet’s biosphere. Eukaryotic organisms such as plants and animals typically depend on organic molecules forenergy, growth, and reproduction. Prokaryotes, on the other hand, can metabolize a wide range of organic as well asinorganic matter, from complex organic molecules like cellulose to inorganic molecules and ions such as atmosphericnitrogen (N2), molecular hydrogen (H2), sulfide (S2−), manganese (II) ions (Mn2+), ferrous iron (Fe2+), and ferriciron (Fe3+), to name a few. By metabolizing such substances, microbes chemically convert them to other forms. Insome cases, microbial metabolism produces chemicals that can be harmful to other organisms; in others, it producessubstances that are essential to the metabolism and survival of other life forms (Figure 8.1).Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 3178.1 Energy, Matter, and EnzymesLearning Objectives• Define and describe metabolism• Compare and contrast autotrophs and heterotrophs• Describe the importance of oxidation-reduction reactions in metabolism• Describe why ATP, FAD, NAD+, and NADP+ are important in a cell• Identify the structure and structural components of an enzyme• Describe the differences between competitive and noncompetitive enzyme inhibitorsThe term used to describe all of the chemical reactions inside a cell is metabolism (Figure 8.2). Cellular processessuch as the building or breaking down of complex molecules occur through series of stepwise, interconnectedchemical reactions called metabolic pathways. Reactions that are spontaneous and release energy are exergonicreactions, whereas endergonic reactions require energy to proceed. The term anabolism refers to those endergonicmetabolic pathways involved in biosynthesis, converting simple molecular building blocks into more complexmolecules, and fueled by the use of cellular energy. Conversely, the term catabolism refers to exergonic pathwaysthat break down complex molecules into simpler ones. Molecular energy stored in the bonds of complex moleculesis released in catabolic pathways and harvested in such a way that it can be used to produce high-energy molecules,which are used to drive anabolic pathways. Thus, in terms of energy and molecules, cells are continually balancingcatabolism with anabolism.Part 1Hannah is a 15-month-old girl from Washington state. She is spending the summer in Gambia, where herparents are working for a nongovernmental organization. About 3 weeks after her arrival in Gambia, Hannah’sappetite began to diminish and her parents noticed that she seemed unusually sluggish, fatigued, andconfused. She also seemed very irritable when she was outdoors, especially during the day. When she beganvomiting, her parents figured she had caught a 24-hour virus, but when her symptoms persisted, they took herto a clinic. The local physician noticed that Hannah’s reflexes seemed abnormally slow, and when he examinedher eyes with a light, she seemed unusually light sensitive. She also seemed to be experiencing a stiff neck.• What are some possible causes of Hannah’s symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus318 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.2 Metabolism includes catabolism and anabolism. Anabolic pathways require energy to synthesize largermolecules. Catabolic pathways generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Both types of pathways arerequired for maintaining the cell’s energy balance.Classification by Carbon and Energy SourceOrganisms can be identified according to the source of carbon they use for metabolism as well as their energy source.The prefixes auto- (“self”) and hetero- (“other”) refer to the origins of the carbon sources various organisms canuse. Organisms that convert inorganic carbon dioxide (CO2) into organic carbon compounds are autotrophs. Plantsand cyanobacteria are well-known examples of autotrophs. Conversely, heterotrophs rely on more complex organiccarbon compounds as nutrients; these are provided to them initially by autotrophs. Many organisms, ranging fromhumans to many prokaryotes, including the well-studied Escherichia coli, are heterotrophic.Organisms can also be identified by the energy source they use. All energy is derived from the transfer of electrons,but the source of electrons differs between various types of organisms. The prefixes photo- (“light”) and chemo-(“chemical”) refer to the energy sources that various organisms use. Those that get their energy for electron transferfrom light are phototrophs, whereas chemotrophs obtain energy for electron transfer by breaking chemical bonds.There are two types of chemotrophs: organotrophs and lithotrophs. Organotrophs, including humans, fungi, andmany prokaryotes, are chemotrophs that obtain energy from organic compounds. Lithotrophs (“litho” means “rock”)are chemotrophs that get energy from inorganic compounds, including hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and reduced iron.Lithotrophy is unique to the microbial world.The strategies used to obtain both carbon and energy can be combined for the classification of organisms accordingto nutritional type. Most organisms are chemoheterotrophs because they use organic molecules as both their electronand carbon sources. Table 8.1 summarizes this and the other classifications.Classifications of Organisms by Energy and Carbon SourceClassifications EnergySourceCarbonSourceExamplesChemoautotrophs Chemical Inorganic Hydrogen-, sulfur-, iron-, nitrogen-, andcarbon monoxide-oxidizing bacteriaChemotrophsChemoheterotrophs Chemical OrganiccompoundsAll animals, most fungi, protozoa, andbacteriaPhotoautotrophs Light Inorganic All plants, algae, cyanobacteria, and greenand purple sulfur bacteriaPhototrophsPhotoheterotrophs Light OrganiccompoundsGreen and purple nonsulfur bacteria,heliobacteriaTable 8.1Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 319• Explain the difference between catabolism and anabolism.• Explain the difference between autotrophs and heterotrophs.Oxidation and Reduction in MetabolismThe transfer of electrons between molecules is important because most of the energy stored in atoms and used to fuelcell functions is in the form of high-energy electrons. The transfer of energy in the form of electrons allows the cell totransfer and use energy incrementally; that is, in small packages rather than a single, destructive burst. Reactions thatremove electrons from donor molecules, leaving them oxidized, are oxidation reactions; those that add electrons toacceptor molecules, leaving them reduced, are reduction reactions. Because electrons can move from one moleculeto another, oxidation and reduction occur in tandem. These pairs of reactions are called oxidation-reduction reactions,or redox reactions.Energy Carriers: NAD+, NADP+, FAD, and ATPThe energy released from the breakdown of the chemical bonds within nutrients can be stored either through thereduction of electron carriers or in the bonds of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). In living systems, a small classof compounds functions as mobile electron carriers, molecules that bind to and shuttle high-energy electronsbetween compounds in pathways. The principal electron carriers we will consider originate from the B vitamin groupand are derivatives of nucleotides; they are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, nicotine adenine dinucleotidephosphate, and flavin adenine dinucleotide. These compounds can be easily reduced or oxidized. Nicotinamideadenine dinucleotide (NAD+/NADH) is the most common mobile electron carrier used in catabolism. NAD+ is theoxidized form of the molecule; NADH is the reduced form of the molecule. Nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate(NADP+), the oxidized form of an NAD+ variant that contains an extra phosphate group, is another importantelectron carrier; it forms NADPH when reduced. The oxidized form of flavin adenine dinucleotide is FAD, and itsreduced form is FADH2. Both NAD+/NADH and FAD/FADH2 are extensively used in energy extraction from sugarsduring catabolism in chemoheterotrophs, whereas NADP+/NADPH plays an important role in anabolic reactions andphotosynthesis. Collectively, FADH2, NADH, and NADPH are often referred to as having reducing power due totheir ability to donate electrons to various chemical reactions.A living cell must be able to handle the energy released during catabolism in a way that enables the cell to storeenergy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cells accomplish this by using the compound adenosinetriphosphate (ATP). ATP is often called the “energy currency” of the cell, and, like currency, this versatile compoundcan be used to fill any energy need of the cell. At the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monophosphate(AMP), which is composed of an adenine molecule bonded to a ribose molecule and a single phosphate group. Riboseis a five-carbon sugar found in RNA, and AMP is one of the nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphategroup to this core molecule results in the formation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP); the addition of a thirdphosphate group forms ATP (Figure 8.3). Adding a phosphate group to a molecule, a process called phosphorylation,requires energy. Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repel one another when they are arranged in series,as they are in ADP and ATP. This repulsion makes the ADP and ATP molecules inherently unstable. Thus, the bondsbetween phosphate groups (one in ADP and two in ATP) are called high-energy phosphate bonds. When these highenergybonds are broken to release one phosphate (called inorganic phosphate [Pi]) or two connected phosphategroups (called pyrophosphate [PPi]) from ATP through a process called dephosphorylation, energy is released todrive endergonic reactions (Figure 8.4).320 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.3 The energy released from dephosphorylation of ATP is used to drive cellular work, including anabolicpathways. ATP is regenerated through phosphorylation, harnessing the energy found in chemicals or from sunlight.(credit: modification of work by Robert Bear, David Rintoul)Figure 8.4 Exergonic reactions are coupled to endergonic ones, making the combination favorable. Here, theendergonic reaction of ATP phosphorylation is coupled to the exergonic reactions of catabolism. Similarly, theexergonic reaction of ATP dephosphorylation is coupled to the endergonic reaction of polypeptide formation, anexample of anabolism.• What is the function of an electron carrier?Enzyme Structure and FunctionA substance that helps speed up a chemical reaction is a catalyst. Catalysts are not used or changed during chemicalreactions and, therefore, are reusable. Whereas inorganic molecules may serve as catalysts for a wide range ofchemical reactions, proteins called enzymes serve as catalysts for biochemical reactions inside cells. Enzymes thusplay an important role in controlling cellular metabolism.An enzyme functions by lowering the activation energy of a chemical reaction inside the cell. Activation energy isthe energy needed to form or break chemical bonds and convert reactants to products (Figure 8.5). Enzymes lowerthe activation energy by binding to the reactant molecules and holding them in such a way as to speed up the reaction.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 321The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are called substrates, and the location within the enzyme wherethe substrate binds is called the enzyme’s active site. The characteristics of the amino acids near the active site createa very specific chemical environment within the active site that induces suitability to binding, albeit briefly, to aspecific substrate (or substrates). Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates, enzymesare known for their specificity. In fact, as an enzyme binds to its substrate(s), the enzyme structure changes slightlyto find the best fit between the transition state (a structural intermediate between the substrate and product) and theactive site, just as a rubber glove molds to a hand inserted into it. This active-site modification in the presence ofsubstrate, along with the simultaneous formation of the transition state, is called induced fit (Figure 8.6). Overall,there is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and, thus, for each chemical reaction; however, there is someflexibility as well. Some enzymes have the ability to act on several different structurally related substrates.Figure 8.5 Enzymes lower the activation energy of a chemical reaction.Figure 8.6 According to the induced-fit model, the active site of the enzyme undergoes conformational changesupon binding with the substrate.Enzymes are subject to influences by local environmental conditions such as pH, substrate concentration, andtemperature. Although increasing the environmental temperature generally increases reaction rates, enzyme catalyzedor otherwise, increasing or decreasing the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bonds withinthe active site, making them less well suited to bind substrates. High temperatures will eventually cause enzymes,like other biological molecules, to denature, losing their three-dimensional structure and function. Enzymes are alsosuited to function best within a certain pH range, and, as with temperature, extreme environmental pH values (acidicor basic) can cause enzymes to denature. Active-site amino-acid side chains have their own acidic or basic propertiesthat are optimal for catalysis and, therefore, are sensitive to changes in pH.Another factor that influences enzyme activity is substrate concentration: Enzyme activity is increased at higher322 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5concentrations of substrate until it reaches a saturation point at which the enzyme can bind no additional substrate.Overall, enzymes are optimized to work best under the environmental conditions in which the organisms that producethem live. For example, while microbes that inhabit hot springs have enzymes that work best at high temperatures,human pathogens have enzymes that work best at 37°C. Similarly, while enzymes produced by most organismswork best at a neutral pH, microbes growing in acidic environments make enzymes optimized to low pH conditions,allowing for their growth at those conditions.Many enzymes do not work optimally, or even at all, unless bound to other specific nonprotein helper molecules,either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds or permanently through stronger covalent bonds. Binding to thesemolecules promotes optimal conformation and function for their respective enzymes. Two types of helper moleculesare cofactors and coenzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron (Fe2+) and magnesium (Mg2+) that helpstabilize enzyme conformation and function. One example of an enzyme that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is theenzyme that builds DNA molecules, DNA polymerase, which requires a bound zinc ion (Zn2+) to function.Coenzymes are organic helper molecules that are required for enzyme action. Like enzymes, they are not consumedand, hence, are reusable. The most common sources of coenzymes are dietary vitamins. Some vitamins are precursorsto coenzymes and others act directly as coenzymes.Some cofactors and coenzymes, like coenzyme A (CoA), often bind to the enzyme’s active site, aiding in thechemistry of the transition of a substrate to a product (Figure 8.7). In such cases, an enzyme lacking a necessarycofactor or coenzyme is called an apoenzyme and is inactive. Conversely, an enzyme with the necessary associatedcofactor or coenzyme is called a holoenzyme and is active. NADH and ATP are also both examples of commonlyused coenzymes that provide high-energy electrons or phosphate groups, respectively, which bind to enzymes, therebyactivating them.Figure 8.7 The binding of a coenzyme or cofactor to an apoenzyme is often required to form an active holoenzyme.• What role do enzymes play in a chemical reaction?Enzyme InhibitorsEnzymes can be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce their activity. There are many different kinds ofmolecules that inhibit or promote enzyme function, and various mechanisms exist for doing so (Figure 8.8). Acompetitive inhibitor is a molecule similar enough to a substrate that it can compete with the substrate for binding toChapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 323the active site by simply blocking the substrate from binding. For a competitive inhibitor to be effective, the inhibitorconcentration needs to be approximately equal to the substrate concentration. Sulfa drugs provide a good example ofcompetitive competition. They are used to treat bacterial infections because they bind to the active site of an enzymewithin the bacterial folic acid synthesis pathway. When present in a sufficient dose, a sulfa drug prevents folic acidsynthesis, and bacteria are unable to grow because they cannot synthesize DNA, RNA, and proteins. Humans areunaffected because we obtain folic acid from our diets.On the other hand, a noncompetitive (allosteric) inhibitor binds to the enzyme at an allosteric site, a location otherthan the active site, and still manages to block substrate binding to the active site by inducing a conformational changethat reduces the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate (Figure 8.9). Because only one inhibitor molecule is neededper enzyme for effective inhibition, the concentration of inhibitors needed for noncompetitive inhibition is typicallymuch lower than the substrate concentration.In addition to allosteric inhibitors, there are allosteric activators that bind to locations on an enzyme away fromthe active site, inducing a conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme’s active site(s) for itssubstrate(s).Allosteric control is an important mechanism of regulation of metabolic pathways involved in both catabolism andanabolism. In a most efficient and elegant way, cells have evolved also to use the products of their own metabolicreactions for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity. Feedback inhibition involves the use of a pathway product toregulate its own further production. The cell responds to the abundance of specific products by slowing productionduring anabolic or catabolic reactions (Figure 8.9).Figure 8.8 Enzyme activity can be regulated by either competitive inhibitors, which bind to the active site, ornoncompetitive inhibitors, which bind to an allosteric site.324 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.9 (a) Binding of an allosteric inhibitor reduces enzyme activity, but binding of an allosteric activatorincreases enzyme activity. (b) Feedback inhibition, where the end product of the pathway serves as a noncompetitiveinhibitor to an enzyme early in the pathway, is an important mechanism of allosteric regulation in cells.• Explain the difference between a competitive inhibitor and a noncompetitive inhibitor.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 3258.2 Catabolism of CarbohydratesLearning Objectives• Describe why glycolysis is not oxygen dependent• Define and describe the net yield of three-carbon molecules, ATP, and NADH from glycolysis• Explain how three-carbon pyruvate molecules are converted into two-carbon acetyl groups that can be funneledinto the Krebs cycle.• Define and describe the net yield of CO2, GTP/ATP, FADH2, and NADH from the Krebs cycle• Explain how intermediate carbon molecules of the Krebs cycle can be used in a cellExtensive enzyme pathways exist for breaking down carbohydrates to capture energy in ATP bonds. In addition,many catabolic pathways produce intermediate molecules that are also used as building blocks for anabolism.Understanding these processes is important for several reasons. First, because the main metabolic processes involvedare common to a wide range of chemoheterotrophic organisms, we can learn a great deal about human metabolismby studying metabolism in more easily manipulated bacteria like E. coli. Second, because animal and humanpathogens are also chemoheterotrophs, learning about the details of metabolism in these bacteria, including possibledifferences between bacterial and human pathways, is useful for the diagnosis of pathogens as well as for thediscovery of antimicrobial therapies targeting specific pathogens. Last, learning specifically about the pathwaysinvolved in chemoheterotrophic metabolism also serves as a basis for comparing other more unusual metabolicstrategies used by microbes. Although the chemical source of electrons initiating electron transfer is different betweenchemoheterorophs and chemoautotrophs, many similar processes are used in both types of organisms.The typical example used to introduce concepts of metabolism to students is carbohydrate catabolism. Forchemoheterotrophs, our examples of metabolism start with the catabolism of polysaccharides such as glycogen,starch, or cellulose. Enzymes such as amylase, which breaks down glycogen or starch, and cellulases, which breakdown cellulose, can cause the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds between the glucose monomers in these polymers,releasing glucose for further catabolism.GlycolysisFor bacteria, eukaryotes, and most archaea, glycolysis is the most common pathway for the catabolism of glucose; itproduces energy, reduced electron carriers, and precursor molecules for cellular metabolism. Every living organismcarries out some form of glycolysis, suggesting this mechanism is an ancient universal metabolic process. The processitself does not use oxygen; however, glycolysis can be coupled with additional metabolic processes that are eitheraerobic or anaerobic. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. It begins with asingle six-carbon glucose molecule and ends with two molecules of a three-carbon sugar called pyruvate. Pyruvatemay be broken down further after glycolysis to harness more energy through aerobic or anaerobic respiration, butmany organisms, including many microbes, may be unable to respire; for these organisms, glycolysis may be theironly source of generating ATP.The type of glycolysis found in animals and that is most common in microbes is the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas(EMP) pathway, named after Gustav Embden (1874–1933), Otto Meyerhof (1884–1951), and Jakub Parnas(1884–1949). Glycolysis using the EMP pathway consists of two distinct phases (Figure 8.10). The first part of thepathway, called the energy investment phase, uses energy from two ATP molecules to modify a glucose moleculeso that the six-carbon sugar molecule can be split evenly into two phosphorylated three-carbon molecules calledglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). The second part of the pathway, called the energy payoff phase, extracts energyby oxidizing G3P to pyruvate, producing four ATP molecules and reducing two molecules of NAD+ to two moleculesof NADH, using electrons that originated from glucose. (A discussion and illustration of the full EMP pathway withchemical structures and enzyme names appear in Appendix C.)The ATP molecules produced during the energy payoff phase of glycolysis are formed by substrate-level326 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5phosphorylation (Figure 8.11), one of two mechanisms for producing ATP. In substrate-level phosphorylation, aphosphate group is removed from an organic molecule and is directly transferred to an available ADP molecule,producing ATP. During glycolysis, high-energy phosphate groups from the intermediate molecules are added to ADPto make ATP.Overall, in this process of glycolysis, the net gain from the breakdown of a single glucose molecule is:• two ATP molecules• two NADH molecule, and• two pyruvate molecules.Figure 8.10 The energy investment phase of the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas glycolysis pathway uses two ATPmolecules to phosphorylate glucose, forming two glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) molecules. The energy payoffphase harnesses the energy in the G3P molecules, producing four ATP molecules, two NADH molecules, and twopyruvates.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 327Figure 8.11 The ATP made during glycolysis is a result of substrate-level phosphorylation. One of the two enzymaticreactions in the energy payoff phase of Embden Meyerhof-Parnas glycolysis that produce ATP in this way is shownhere.Other Glycolytic PathwaysWhen we refer to glycolysis, unless otherwise indicated, we are referring to the EMP pathway used by animalsand many bacteria. However, some prokaryotes use alternative glycolytic pathways. One important alternative is theEntner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway, named after its discoverers Nathan Entner and Michael Doudoroff (1911–1975).Although some bacteria, including the opportunistic gram-negative pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa, contain onlythe ED pathway for glycolysis, other bacteria, like E. coli, have the ability to use either the ED pathway or the EMPpathway.A third type of glycolytic pathway that occurs in all cells, which is quite different from the previous two pathways, isthe pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) also called the phosphogluconate pathway or the hexose monophosphateshunt. Evidence suggests that the PPP may be the most ancient universal glycolytic pathway. The intermediates fromthe PPP are used for the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids. Therefore, this glycolytic pathway may befavored when the cell has need for nucleic acid and/or protein synthesis, respectively. A discussion and illustration ofthe complete ED pathway and PPP with chemical structures and enzyme names appear in Appendix C.• When might an organism use the ED pathway or the PPP for glycolysis?Transition Reaction, Coenzyme A, and the Krebs CycleGlycolysis produces pyruvate, which can be further oxidized to capture more energy. For pyruvate to enter the nextoxidative pathway, it must first be decarboxylated by the enzyme complex pyruvate dehydrogenase to a two-carbonacetyl group in the transition reaction, also called the bridge reaction (see Appendix C and Figure 8.12). Inthe transition reaction, electrons are also transferred to NAD+ to form NADH. To proceed to the next phase of thismetabolic process, the comparatively tiny two-carbon acetyl must be attached to a very large carrier compound calledcoenzyme A (CoA). The transition reaction occurs in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryotes; in prokaryotes, it occursin the cytoplasm because prokaryotes lack membrane-enclosed organelles.328 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.12 (a) Coenzyme A is shown here without an attached acetyl group. (b) Coenzyme A is shown here withan attached acetyl group.The Krebs cycle transfers remaining electrons from the acetyl group produced during the transition reaction toelectron carrier molecules, thus reducing them. The Krebs cycle also occurs in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes alongwith glycolysis and the transition reaction, but it takes place in the mitochondrial matrix of eukaryotic cells wherethe transition reaction also occurs. The Krebs cycle is named after its discoverer, British scientist Hans Adolf Krebs(1900–1981) and is also called the citric acid cycle, or the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) because citric acid hasthree carboxyl groups in its structure. Unlike glycolysis, the Krebs cycle is a closed loop: The last part of the pathwayregenerates the compound used in the first step (Figure 8.13). The eight steps of the cycle are a series of chemicalreactions that capture the two-carbon acetyl group (the CoA carrier does not enter the Krebs cycle) from the transitionreaction, which is added to a four-carbon intermediate in the Krebs cycle, producing the six-carbon intermediatecitric acid (giving the alternate name for this cycle). As one turn of the cycle returns to the starting point of the fourcarbonintermediate, the cycle produces two CO2 molecules, one ATP molecule (or an equivalent, such as guanosinetriphosphate [GTP]) produced by substrate-level phosphorylation, and three molecules of NADH and one of FADH2.(A discussion and detailed illustration of the full Krebs cycle appear in Appendix C.)Although many organisms use the Krebs cycle as described as part of glucose metabolism, several of the intermediatecompounds in the Krebs cycle can be used in synthesizing a wide variety of important cellular molecules, includingamino acids, chlorophylls, fatty acids, and nucleotides; therefore, the cycle is both anabolic and catabolic (Figure8.14).Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 329Figure 8.13 The Krebs cycle, also known as the citric acid cycle, is summarized here. Note incoming two-carbonacetyl results in the main outputs per turn of two CO2, three NADH, one FADH2, and one ATP (or GTP) moleculesmade by substrate-level phosphorylation. Two turns of the Krebs cycle are required to process all of the carbon fromone glucose molecule.Figure 8.14 Many organisms use intermediates from the Krebs cycle, such as amino acids, fatty acids, andnucleotides, as building blocks for biosynthesis.330 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.58.3 Cellular RespirationLearning Objectives• Compare and contrast the electron transport system location and function in a prokaryotic cell and a eukaryoticcell• Compare and contrast the differences between substrate-level and oxidative phosphorylation• Explain the relationship between chemiosmosis and proton motive force• Describe the function and location of ATP synthase in a prokaryotic versus eukaryotic cell• Compare and contrast aerobic and anaerobic respirationWe have just discussed two pathways in glucose catabolism—glycolysis and the Krebs cycle—that generate ATPby substrate-level phosphorylation. Most ATP, however, is generated during a separate process called oxidativephosphorylation, which occurs during cellular respiration. Cellular respiration begins when electrons are transferredfrom NADH and FADH2—made in glycolysis, the transition reaction, and the Krebs cycle—through a series ofchemical reactions to a final inorganic electron acceptor (either oxygen in aerobic respiration or non-oxygen inorganicmolecules in anaerobic respiration). These electron transfers take place on the inner part of the cell membrane ofprokaryotic cells or in specialized protein complexes in the inner membrane of the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells.The energy of the electrons is harvested to generate an electrochemical gradient across the membrane, which is usedto make ATP by oxidative phosphorylation.Electron Transport SystemThe electron transport system (ETS) is the last component involved in the process of cellular respiration; itcomprises a series of membrane-associated protein complexes and associated mobile accessory electron carriers(Figure 8.15). Electron transport is a series of chemical reactions that resembles a bucket brigade in that electronsfrom NADH and FADH2 are passed rapidly from one ETS electron carrier to the next. These carriers can passelectrons along in the ETS because of their redox potential. For a protein or chemical to accept electrons, it musthave a more positive redox potential than the electron donor. Therefore, electrons move from electron carriers withmore negative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential. The four major classes of electron carriersinvolved in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic electron transport systems are the cytochromes, flavoproteins, iron-sulfurproteins, and the quinones.In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor (i.e., the one having the most positive redox potential) at the endof the ETS is an oxygen molecule (O2) that becomes reduced to water (H2O) by the final ETS carrier. This electroncarrier, cytochrome oxidase, differs between bacterial types and can be used to differentiate closely related bacteriafor diagnoses. For example, the gram-negative opportunist Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the gram-negative choleracausingVibrio cholerae use cytochrome c oxidase, which can be detected by the oxidase test, whereas other gramnegativeEnterobacteriaceae, like E. coli, are negative for this test because they produce different cytochrome oxidasetypes.There are many circumstances under which aerobic respiration is not possible, including any one or more of thefollowing:• The cell lacks genes encoding an appropriate cytochrome oxidase for transferring electrons to oxygen at theend of the electron transport system.• The cell lacks genes encoding enzymes to minimize the severely damaging effects of dangerous oxygenradicals produced during aerobic respiration, such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or superoxide ⎛⎝O2–⎞ ⎠.• The cell lacks a sufficient amount of oxygen to carry out aerobic respiration.One possible alternative to aerobic respiration is anaerobic respiration, using an inorganic molecule other thanoxygen as a final electron acceptor. There are many types of anaerobic respiration found in bacteria and archaea.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 331Denitrifiers are important soil bacteria that use nitrate ⎛⎝NO3–⎞⎠and nitrite ⎛⎝NO2–⎞⎠as final electron acceptors,producing nitrogen gas (N2). Many aerobically respiring bacteria, including E. coli, switch to using nitrate as a finalelectron acceptor and producing nitrite when oxygen levels have been depleted.Microbes using anaerobic respiration commonly have an intact Krebs cycle, so these organisms can access the energyof the NADH and FADH2 molecules formed. However, anaerobic respirers use altered ETS carriers encoded by theirgenomes, including distinct complexes for electron transfer to their final electron acceptors. Smaller electrochemicalgradients are generated from these electron transfer systems, so less ATP is formed through anaerobic respiration.• Do both aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration use an electron transport chain?Chemiosmosis, Proton Motive Force, and Oxidative PhosphorylationIn each transfer of an electron through the ETS, the electron loses energy, but with some transfers, the energy isstored as potential energy by using it to pump hydrogen ions (H+) across a membrane. In prokaryotic cells, H+ ispumped to the outside of the cytoplasmic membrane (called the periplasmic space in gram-negative and gram-positivebacteria), and in eukaryotic cells, they are pumped from the mitochondrial matrix across the inner mitochondrialmembrane into the intermembrane space. There is an uneven distribution of H+ across the membrane that establishesan electrochemical gradient because H+ ions are positively charged (electrical) and there is a higher concentration(chemical) on one side of the membrane. This electrochemical gradient formed by the accumulation of H+ (alsoknown as a proton) on one side of the membrane compared with the other is referred to as the proton motive force(PMF). Because the ions involved are H+, a pH gradient is also established, with the side of the membrane having thehigher concentration of H+ being more acidic. Beyond the use of the PMF to make ATP, as discussed in this chapter,the PMF can also be used to drive other energetically unfavorable processes, including nutrient transport and flagellarotation for motility.The potential energy of this electrochemical gradient generated by the ETS causes the H+ to diffuse across amembrane (the plasma membrane in prokaryotic cells and the inner membrane in mitochondria in eukaryoticcells). This flow of hydrogen ions across the membrane, called chemiosmosis, must occur through a channel inthe membrane via a membrane-bound enzyme complex called ATP synthase (Figure 8.15). The tendency formovement in this way is much like water accumulated on one side of a dam, moving through the dam when opened.ATP synthase (like a combination of the intake and generator of a hydroelectric dam) is a complex protein that actsas a tiny generator, turning by the force of the H+ diffusing through the enzyme, down their electrochemical gradientfrom where there are many mutually repelling H+ to where there are fewer H+. In prokaryotic cells, H+ flows fromthe outside of the cytoplasmic membrane into the cytoplasm, whereas in eukaryotic mitochondria, H+ flows fromthe intermembrane space to the mitochondrial matrix. The turning of the parts of this molecular machine regeneratesATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) by oxidative phosphorylation, a second mechanism for making ATP thatharvests the potential energy stored within an electrochemical gradient.332 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.15 The bacterial electron transport chain is a series of protein complexes, electron carriers, and ion pumpsthat is used to pump H+ out of the bacterial cytoplasm into the extracellular space. H+ flows back down theelectrochemical gradient into the bacterial cytoplasm through ATP synthase, providing the energy for ATP productionby oxidative phosphorylation.(credit: modification of work by Klaus Hoffmeier)The number of ATP molecules generated from the catabolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of hydrogenions that the electron transport system complexes can pump through the membrane varies between different speciesof organisms. In aerobic respiration in mitochondria, the passage of electrons from one molecule of NADH generatesenough proton motive force to make three ATP molecules by oxidative phosphorylation, whereas the passage ofelectrons from one molecule of FADH2 generates enough proton motive force to make only two ATP molecules. Thus,the 10 NADH molecules made per glucose during glycolysis, the transition reaction, and the Krebs cycle carry enoughenergy to make 30 ATP molecules, whereas the two FADH2 molecules made per glucose during these processesprovide enough energy to make four ATP molecules. Overall, the theoretical maximum yield of ATP made during thecomplete aerobic respiration of glucose is 38 molecules, with four being made by substrate-level phosphorylation and34 being made by oxidative phosphorylation (Figure 8.16). In reality, the total ATP yield is usually less, rangingfrom one to 34 ATP molecules, depending on whether the cell is using aerobic respiration or anaerobic respiration;in eukaryotic cells, some energy is expended to transport intermediates from the cytoplasm into the mitochondria,affecting ATP yield.Figure 8.16 summarizes the theoretical maximum yields of ATP from various processes during the complete aerobicrespiration of one glucose molecule.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 333Figure 8.16• What are the functions of the proton motive force?8.4 FermentationLearning Objectives• Define fermentation and explain why it does not require oxygen• Describe the fermentation pathways and their end products and give examples of microorganisms that use thesepathways• Compare and contrast fermentation and anaerobic respirationMany cells are unable to carry out respiration because of one or more of the following circumstances:1. The cell lacks a sufficient amount of any appropriate, inorganic, final electron acceptor to carry out cellularrespiration.2. The cell lacks genes to make appropriate complexes and electron carriers in the electron transport system.3. The cell lacks genes to make one or more enzymes in the Krebs cycle.Whereas lack of an appropriate inorganic final electron acceptor is environmentally dependent, the other twoconditions are genetically determined. Thus, many prokaryotes, including members of the clinically important334 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5genus Streptococcus, are permanently incapable of respiration, even in the presence of oxygen. Conversely, manyprokaryotes are facultative, meaning that, should the environmental conditions change to provide an appropriateinorganic final electron acceptor for respiration, organisms containing all the genes required to do so will switch tocellular respiration for glucose metabolism because respiration allows for much greater ATP production per glucosemolecule.If respiration does not occur, NADH must be reoxidized to NAD+ for reuse as an electron carrier for glycolysis, thecell’s only mechanism for producing any ATP, to continue. Some living systems use an organic molecule (commonlypyruvate) as a final electron acceptor through a process called fermentation. Fermentation does not involve anelectron transport system and does not directly produce any additional ATP beyond that produced during glycolysisby substrate-level phosphorylation. Organisms carrying out fermentation, called fermenters, produce a maximum oftwo ATP molecules per glucose during glycolysis. Table 8.2 compares the final electron acceptors and methods ofATP synthesis in aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration, and fermentation. Note that the number of ATP moleculesshown for glycolysis assumes the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. The number of ATP molecules made bysubstrate-level phosphorylation (SLP) versus oxidative phosphorylation (OP) are indicated.Comparison of Respiration Versus FermentationType ofMetabolismExample Final Electron Acceptor Pathways Involved inATP Synthesis (Type ofPhosphorylation)MaximumYield ofATPMoleculesEMP glycolysis (SLP)Krebs cycle (SLP)Electron transport andchemiosmosis (OP):2234AerobicrespirationPseudomonasaeruginosaO2Total 38EMP glycolysis (SLP)Krebs cycle (SLP)Electron transport andchemiosmosis (OP):221–32AnaerobicrespirationParacoccusdenitrificans NO3− , SO4−2, Fe+3, CO2,other inorganicsTotal 5–36EMP glycolysis (SLP)Fermentation20Fermentation CandidaalbicansOrganics(usually pyruvate)Total 2Table 8.2Microbial fermentation processes have been manipulated by humans and are used extensively in the production ofvarious foods and other commercial products, including pharmaceuticals. Microbial fermentation can also be usefulfor identifying microbes for diagnostic purposes.Fermentation by some bacteria, like those in yogurt and other soured food products, and by animals in muscles duringoxygen depletion, is lactic acid fermentation. The chemical reaction of lactic acid fermentation is as follows:Pyruvate + NADH ↔ lactic acid + NAD+Bacteria of several gram-positive genera, including Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Streptococcus, are collectivelyknown as the lactic acid bacteria (LAB), and various strains are important in food production. During yogurt andcheese production, the highly acidic environment generated by lactic acid fermentation denatures proteins containedin milk, causing it to solidify. When lactic acid is the only fermentation product, the process is said to be homolacticfermentation; such is the case for Lactobacillus delbrueckii and S. thermophiles used in yogurt production. However,many bacteria perform heterolactic fermentation, producing a mixture of lactic acid, ethanol and/or acetic acid, andChapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 335CO2 as a result, because of their use of the branched pentose phosphate pathway instead of the EMP pathway forglycolysis. One important heterolactic fermenter is Leuconostoc mesenteroides, which is used for souring vegetableslike cucumbers and cabbage, producing pickles and sauerkraut, respectively.Lactic acid bacteria are also important medically. The production of low pH environments within the body inhibitsthe establishment and growth of pathogens in these areas. For example, the vaginal microbiota is composed largely oflactic acid bacteria, but when these bacteria are reduced, yeast can proliferate, causing a yeast infection. Additionally,lactic acid bacteria are important in maintaining the health of the gastrointestinal tract and, as such, are the primarycomponent of probiotics.Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation, which produces ethanol. The ethanol fermentationreaction is shown in Figure 8.17. In the first reaction, the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase removes a carboxylgroup from pyruvate, releasing CO2 gas while producing the two-carbon molecule acetaldehyde. The second reaction,catalyzed by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase, transfers an electron from NADH to acetaldehyde, producingethanol and NAD+. The ethanol fermentation of pyruvate by the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is used in theproduction of alcoholic beverages and also makes bread products rise due to CO2 production. Outside of the foodindustry, ethanol fermentation of plant products is important in biofuel production.Figure 8.17 The chemical reactions of alcohol fermentation are shown here. Ethanol fermentation is important in theproduction of alcoholic beverages and bread.Beyond lactic acid fermentation and alcohol fermentation, many other fermentation methods occur in prokaryotes,all for the purpose of ensuring an adequate supply of NAD+ for glycolysis (Table 8.3). Without these pathways,glycolysis would not occur and no ATP would be harvested from the breakdown of glucose. It should be noted thatmost forms of fermentation besides homolactic fermentation produce gas, commonly CO2 and/or hydrogen gas. Manyof these different types of fermentation pathways are also used in food production and each results in the productionof different organic acids, contributing to the unique flavor of a particular fermented food product. The propionic acidproduced during propionic acid fermentation contributes to the distinctive flavor of Swiss cheese, for example.Several fermentation products are important commercially outside of the food industry. For example, chemicalsolvents such as acetone and butanol are produced during acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation. Complex organicpharmaceutical compounds used in antibiotics (e.g., penicillin), vaccines, and vitamins are produced through mixedacid fermentation. Fermentation products are used in the laboratory to differentiate various bacteria for diagnosticpurposes. For example, enteric bacteria are known for their ability to perform mixed acid fermentation, reducingthe pH, which can be detected using a pH indicator. Similarly, the bacterial production of acetoin during butanediolfermentation can also be detected. Gas production from fermentation can also be seen in an inverted Durham tubethat traps produced gas in a broth culture.Microbes can also be differentiated according to the substrates they can ferment. For example, E. coli can fermentlactose, forming gas, whereas some of its close gram-negative relatives cannot. The ability to ferment the sugaralcohol sorbitol is used to identify the pathogenic enterohemorrhagic O157:H7 strain of E. coli because, unlike otherE. coli strains, it is unable to ferment sorbitol. Last, mannitol fermentation differentiates the mannitol-fermentingStaphylococcus aureus from other non–mannitol-fermenting staphylococci.336 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Common Fermentation PathwaysPathway End Products Example Microbes Commercial ProductsAcetonebutanolethanolAcetone, butanol, ethanol, CO2ClostridiumacetobutylicumCommercial solvents,gasoline alternativeAlcohol Ethanol, CO2Candida,Saccharomyces Beer, breadButanediolFormic and lactic acid; ethanol; acetoin; 2,3butanediol; CO2; hydrogen gasKlebsiella,Enterobacter Chardonnay wineButyric acid Butyric acid, CO2, hydrogen gasClostridiumbutyricum ButterLactic acid Lactic acidStreptococcus,LactobacillusSauerkraut, yogurt,cheeseMixed acidAcetic, formic, lactic, and succinic acids;ethanol, CO2, hydrogen gasEscherichia,ShigellaVinegar, cosmetics,pharmaceuticalsPropionicacid Acetic acid, propionic acid, CO2Propionibacterium,Bifidobacterium Swiss cheeseTable 8.3• When would a metabolically versatile microbe perform fermentation rather than cellular respiration?Identifying Bacteria by Using API Test PanelsIdentification of a microbial isolate is essential for the proper diagnosis and appropriate treatment of patients.Scientists have developed techniques that identify bacteria according to their biochemical characteristics.Typically, they either examine the use of specific carbon sources as substrates for fermentation or othermetabolic reactions, or they identify fermentation products or specific enzymes present in reactions. In the past,microbiologists have used individual test tubes and plates to conduct biochemical testing. However, scientists,especially those in clinical laboratories, now more frequently use plastic, disposable, multitest panels thatcontain a number of miniature reaction tubes, each typically including a specific substrate and pH indicator.After inoculation of the test panel with a small sample of the microbe in question and incubation, scientistscan compare the results to a database that includes the expected results for specific biochemical reactionsfor known microbes, thus enabling rapid identification of a sample microbe. These test panels have allowedscientists to reduce costs while improving efficiency and reproducibility by performing a larger number of testssimultaneously.Many commercial, miniaturized biochemical test panels cover a number of clinically important groups ofbacteria and yeasts. One of the earliest and most popular test panels is the Analytical Profile Index (API) panelinvented in the 1970s. Once some basic laboratory characterization of a given strain has been performed,such as determining the strain’s Gram morphology, an appropriate test strip that contains 10 to 20 differentbiochemical tests for differentiating strains within that microbial group can be used. Currently, the various APIMicro ConnectionsChapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 337strips can be used to quickly and easily identify more than 600 species of bacteria, both aerobic and anaerobic,and approximately 100 different types of yeasts. Based on the colors of the reactions when metabolic endproducts are present, due to the presence of pH indicators, a metabolic profile is created from the results(Figure 8.18). Microbiologists can then compare the sample’s profile to the database to identify the specificmicrobe.Figure 8.18 The API 20NE test strip is used to identify specific strains of gram-negative bacteria outside theEnterobacteriaceae. Here is an API 20NE test strip result for Photobacterium damselae ssp. piscicida.Part 2Many of Hannah’s symptoms are consistent with several different infections, including influenza andpneumonia. However, her sluggish reflexes along with her light sensitivity and stiff neck suggest somepossible involvement of the central nervous system, perhaps indicating meningitis. Meningitis is an infectionof the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) around the brain and spinal cord that causes inflammation of the meninges,the protective layers covering the brain. Meningitis can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or fungi. Althoughall forms of meningitis are serious, bacterial meningitis is particularly serious. Bacterial meningitis may becaused by several different bacteria, but the bacterium Neisseria meningitidis, a gram-negative, bean-shapeddiplococcus, is a common cause and leads to death within 1 to 2 days in 5% to 10% of patients.Given the potential seriousness of Hannah’s conditions, her physician advised her parents to take her to thehospital in the Gambian capital of Banjul and there have her tested and treated for possible meningitis. After a3-hour drive to the hospital, Hannah was immediately admitted. Physicians took a blood sample and performeda lumbar puncture to test her CSF. They also immediately started her on a course of the antibiotic ceftriaxone,the drug of choice for treatment of meningitis caused by N. meningitidis, without waiting for laboratory testresults.• How might biochemical testing be used to confirm the identity of N. meningitidis?• Why did Hannah’s doctors decide to administer antibiotics without waiting for the test results?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.8.5 Catabolism of Lipids and ProteinsLearning Objectives• Describe how lipids are catabolized• Describe how lipid catabolism can be used to identify microbes• Describe how proteins are catabolized• Describe how protein catabolism can be used to identify bacteriaPrevious sections have discussed the catabolism of glucose, which provides energy to living cells, as well as howClinical Focus338 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5polysaccharides like glycogen, starch, and cellulose are degraded to glucose monomers. But microbes consumemore than just carbohydrates for food. In fact, the microbial world is known for its ability to degrade a wide rangeof molecules, both naturally occurring and those made by human processes, for use as carbon sources. In thissection, we will see that the pathways for both lipid and protein catabolism connect to those used for carbohydratecatabolism, eventually leading into glycolysis, the transition reaction, and the Krebs cycle pathways. Metabolicpathways should be considered to be porous—that is, substances enter from other pathways, and intermediates leavefor other pathways. These pathways are not closed systems. Many of the substrates, intermediates, and products in aparticular pathway are reactants in other pathways.Lipid CatabolismTriglycerides are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. They are made of glycerol and three fatty acids(see Figure 7.12). Phospholipids compose the cell and organelle membranes of all organisms except the archaea.Phospholipid structure is similar to triglycerides except that one of the fatty acids is replaced by a phosphorylatedhead group (see Figure 7.13). Triglycerides and phospholipids are broken down first by releasing fatty acid chains(and/or the phosphorylated head group, in the case of phospholipids) from the three-carbon glycerol backbone.The reactions breaking down triglycerides are catalyzed by lipases and those involving phospholipids are catalyzedby phospholipases. These enzymes contribute to the virulence of certain microbes, such as the bacteriumStaphylococcus aureus and the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans. These microbes use phospholipases to destroylipids and phospholipids in host cells and then use the catabolic products for energy (see Virulence Factors ofBacterial and Viral Pathogens).The resulting products of lipid catabolism, glycerol and fatty acids, can be further degraded. Glycerol can bephosphorylated to glycerol-3-phosphate and easily converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, which continuesthrough glycolysis. The released fatty acids are catabolized in a process called β-oxidation, which sequentiallyremoves two-carbon acetyl groups from the ends of fatty acid chains, reducing NAD+ and FAD to produce NADHand FADH2, respectively, whose electrons can be used to make ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. The acetyl groupsproduced during β-oxidation are carried by coenzyme A to the Krebs cycle, and their movement through this cycleresults in their degradation to CO2, producing ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation and additional NADH andFADH2 molecules (see Appendix C for a detailed illustration of β-oxidation).Other types of lipids can also be degraded by certain microbes. For example, the ability of certain pathogens, likeMycobacterium tuberculosis, to degrade cholesterol contributes to their virulence. The side chains of cholesterolcan be easily removed enzymatically, but degradation of the remaining fused rings is more problematic. The fourfused rings are sequentially broken in a multistep process facilitated by specific enzymes, and the resulting products,including pyruvate, can be further catabolized in the Krebs cycle.• How can lipases and phospholipases contribute to virulence in microbes?Protein CatabolismProteins are degraded through the concerted action of a variety of microbial protease enzymes. Extracellularproteases cut proteins internally at specific amino acid sequences, breaking them down into smaller peptides that canthen be taken up by cells. Some clinically important pathogens can be identified by their ability to produce a specifictype of extracellular protease. For example, the production of the extracellular protease gelatinase by members of thegenera Proteus and Serratia can be used to distinguish them from other gram-negative enteric bacteria. Followinginoculation and growth of microbes in gelatin broth, degradation of the gelatin protein due to gelatinase productionprevents solidification of gelatin when refrigerated. Other pathogens can be distinguished by their ability to degradecasein, the main protein found in milk. When grown on skim milk agar, production of the extracellular proteaseChapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 339caseinase causes degradation of casein, which appears as a zone of clearing around the microbial growth. Caseinaseproduction by the opportunist pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa can be used to distinguish it from other relatedgram-negative bacteria.After extracellular protease degradation and uptake of peptides in the cell, the peptides can then be broken downfurther into individual amino acids by additional intracellular proteases, and each amino acid can be enzymaticallydeaminated to remove the amino group. The remaining molecules can then enter the transition reaction or the Krebscycle.• How can protein catabolism help identify microbes?Part 3Because bacterial meningitis progresses so rapidly, Hannah’s doctors had decided to treat her aggressivelywith antibiotics, based on empirical observation of her symptoms. However, laboratory testing to confirm thecause of Hannah’s meningitis was still important for several reasons. N. meningitidis is an infectious pathogenthat can be spread from person to person through close contact; therefore, if tests confirm N. meningitidis asthe cause of Hannah’s symptoms, Hannah’s parents and others who came into close contact with her mightneed to be vaccinated or receive prophylactic antibiotics to lower their risk of contracting the disease. On theother hand, if it turns out that N. meningitidis is not the cause, Hannah’s doctors might need to change hertreatment.The clinical laboratory performed a Gram stain on Hannah’s blood and CSF samples. The Gram stainshowed the presence of a bean-shaped gram-negative diplococcus. The technician in the hospital lab culturedHannah’s blood sample on both blood agar and chocolate agar, and the bacterium that grew on both mediaformed gray, nonhemolytic colonies. Next, he performed an oxidase test on this bacterium and determined thatit was oxidase positive. Last, he examined the repertoire of sugars that the bacterium could use as a carbonsource and found that the bacterium was positive for glucose and maltose use but negative for lactose andsucrose use. All of these test results are consistent with characteristics of N. meningitidis.• What do these test results tell us about the metabolic pathways of N. meningitidis?• Why do you think that the hospital used these biochemical tests for identification in lieu of molecularanalysis by DNA testing?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.8.6 PhotosynthesisLearning Objectives• Describe the function and locations of photosynthetic pigments in eukaryotes and prokaryotes• Describe the major products of the light-dependent and light-independent reactions• Describe the reactions that produce glucose in a photosynthetic cell• Compare and contrast cyclic and noncyclic photophosphorylationHeterotrophic organisms ranging from E. coli to humans rely on the chemical energy found mainly in carbohydrateClinical Focus340 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5molecules. Many of these carbohydrates are produced by photosynthesis, the biochemical process by whichphototrophic organisms convert solar energy (sunlight) into chemical energy. Although photosynthesis is mostcommonly associated with plants, microbial photosynthesis is also a significant supplier of chemical energy, fuelingmany diverse ecosystems. In this section, we will focus on microbial photosynthesis.Photosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages: the light-dependent reactions and the light-independent reactions(Figure 8.19). In the light-dependent reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by pigment molecules inphotosynthetic membranes and converted into stored chemical energy. In the light-independent reactions, thechemical energy produced by the light-dependent reactions is used to drive the assembly of sugar moleculesusing CO2; however, these reactions are still light dependent because the products of the light-dependent reactionsnecessary for driving them are short-lived. The light-dependent reactions produce ATP and either NADPH or NADHto temporarily store energy. These energy carriers are used in the light-independent reactions to drive the energeticallyunfavorable process of “fixing” inorganic CO2 in an organic form, sugar.Figure 8.19 The light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis (left) convert light energy into chemical energy, formingATP and NADPH. These products are used by the light-independent reactions to fix CO2, producing organic carbonmolecules.Photosynthetic Structures in Eukaryotes and ProkaryotesIn all phototrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside a chloroplast, an organelle that arose in eukaryotesby endosymbiosis of a photosynthetic bacterium (see Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic Cells). Thesechloroplasts are enclosed by a double membrane with inner and outer layers. Within the chloroplast is a thirdmembrane that forms stacked, disc-shaped photosynthetic structures called thylakoids (Figure 8.20). A stack ofthylakoids is called a granum, and the space surrounding the granum within the chloroplast is called stroma.Photosynthetic membranes in prokaryotes, by contrast, are not organized into distinct membrane-enclosed organelles;rather, they are infolded regions of the plasma membrane. In cyanobacteria, for example, these infolded regions arealso referred to as thylakoids. In either case, embedded within the thylakoid membranes or other photosyntheticbacterial membranes are photosynthetic pigment molecules organized into one or more photosystems, where lightenergy is actually converted into chemical energy.Photosynthetic pigments within the photosynthetic membranes are organized into photosystems, each of which iscomposed of a light-harvesting (antennae) complex and a reaction center. The light-harvesting complex consists ofChapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 341multiple proteins and associated pigments that each may absorb light energy and, thus, become excited. This energy istransferred from one pigment molecule to another until eventually (after about a millionth of a second) it is deliveredto the reaction center. Up to this point, only energy—not electrons—has been transferred between molecules. Thereaction center contains a pigment molecule that can undergo oxidation upon excitation, actually giving up anelectron. It is at this step in photosynthesis that light energy is converted into an excited electron.Different kinds of light-harvesting pigments absorb unique patterns of wavelengths (colors) of visible light. Pigmentsreflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, making them appear the corresponding color. Examples ofphotosynthetic pigments (molecules used to absorb solar energy) are bacteriochlorophylls (green, purple, or red),carotenoids (orange, red, or yellow), chlorophylls (green), phycocyanins (blue), and phycoerythrins (red). By havingmixtures of pigments, an organism can absorb energy from more wavelengths. Because photosynthetic bacteriacommonly grow in competition for sunlight, each type of photosynthetic bacteria is optimized for harvesting thewavelengths of light to which it is commonly exposed, leading to stratification of microbial communities in aquaticand soil ecosystems by light quality and penetration.Once the light harvesting complex transfers the energy to the reaction center, the reaction center delivers itshigh-energy electrons, one by one, to an electron carrier in an electron transport system, and electron transferthrough the ETS is initiated. The ETS is similar to that used in cellular respiration and is embedded within thephotosynthetic membrane. Ultimately, the electron is used to produce NADH or NADPH. The electrochemicalgradient that forms across the photosynthetic membrane is used to generate ATP by chemiosmosis through the processof photophosphorylation, another example of oxidative phosphorylation (Figure 8.21).Figure 8.20 (a) Photosynthesis in eukaryotes takes place in chloroplasts, which contain thylakoids stacked intograna. (b) A photosynthetic prokaryote has infolded regions of the plasma membrane that function like thylakoids.(credit: scale bar data from Matt Russell.)342 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.21 This figure summarizes how a photosystem works. Light harvesting (LH) pigments absorb light energy,converting it to chemical energy. The energy is passed from one LH pigment to another until it reaches a reactioncenter (RC) pigment, exciting an electron. This high-energy electron is lost from the RC pigment and passed throughan electron transport system (ETS), ultimately producing NADH or NADPH and ATP. A reduced molecule (H2A)donates an electron, replacing electrons to the electron-deficient RC pigment.• In a phototrophic eukaryote, where does photosynthesis take place?Oxygenic and Anoxygenic PhotosynthesisFor photosynthesis to continue, the electron lost from the reaction center pigment must be replaced. The sourceof this electron (H2A) differentiates the oxygenic photosynthesis of plants and cyanobacteria from anoxygenicphotosynthesis carried out by other types of bacterial phototrophs (Figure 8.22). In oxygenic photosynthesis, H2Ois split and supplies the electron to the reaction center. Because oxygen is generated as a byproduct and is released,this type of photosynthesis is referred to as oxygenic photosynthesis. However, when other reduced compounds serveas the electron donor, oxygen is not generated; these types of photosynthesis are called anoxygenic photosynthesis.Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) or thiosulfate ⎛⎝S2 O32−⎞⎠can serve as the electron donor, generating elemental sulfur andsulfate ⎛⎝SO42−⎞⎠ions, respectively, as a result.Photosystems have been classified into two types: photosystem I (PSI) and photosystem II (PSII) (Figure 8.23).Cyanobacteria and plant chloroplasts have both photosystems, whereas anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria use onlyone of the photosystems. Both photosystems are excited by light energy simultaneously. If the cell requires bothATP and NADPH for biosynthesis, then it will carry out noncyclic photophosphorylation. Upon passing of the PSIIreaction center electron to the ETS that connects PSII and PSI, the lost electron from the PSII reaction center isreplaced by the splitting of water. The excited PSI reaction center electron is used to reduce NADP+ to NADPH andis replaced by the electron exiting the ETS. The flow of electrons in this way is called the Z-scheme.If a cell’s need for ATP is significantly greater than its need for NADPH, it may bypass the production of reducingpower through cyclic photophosphorylation. Only PSI is used during cyclic photophosphorylation; the high-energyelectron of the PSI reaction center is passed to an ETS carrier and then ultimately returns to the oxidized PSI reactioncenter pigment, thereby reducing it.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 343Figure 8.22 Eukaryotes and cyanobacteria carry out oxygenic photosynthesis, producing oxygen, whereas otherbacteria carry out anoxygenic photosynthesis, which does not produce oxygen.344 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 8.23 (a) PSI and PSII are found on the thylakoid membrane. The high-energy electron from PSII is passed toan ETS, which generates a proton motive force for ATP synthesis by chemiosmosis, and ultimately replaces theelectron lost by the PSI reaction center. The PSI reaction center electron is used to make NADPH. (b) When bothATP and NADPH are required, noncyclic photophosphorylation (in cyanobacteria and plants) provides both. Theelectron flow described here is referred to as the Z-scheme (shown in yellow in [a]). When the cell’s ATP needsoutweigh those for NADPH, cyanobacteria and plants will use only PSI, and its reaction center electron is passed tothe ETS to generate a proton motive force used for ATP synthesis.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 345• Why would a photosynthetic bacterium have different pigments?Light-Independent ReactionsAfter the energy from the sun is converted into chemical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPHmolecules (having lifespans of millionths of a second), photoautotrophs have the fuel needed to build multicarboncarbohydrate molecules, which can survive for hundreds of millions of years, for long-term energy storage. Thecarbon comes from CO2, the gas that is a waste product of cellular respiration.The Calvin-Benson cycle (named for Melvin Calvin [1911–1997] and Andrew Benson [1917–2015]), thebiochemical pathway used for fixation of CO2, is located within the cytoplasm of photosynthetic bacteria and in thestroma of eukaryotic chloroplasts. The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle can be organized into threebasic stages: fixation, reduction, and regeneration (see Appendix C for a detailed illustration of the Calvin cycle).• Fixation: The enzyme ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RuBisCO) catalyzes the addition of a CO2 toribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). This results in the production of 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA).• Reduction: Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH (from the light-dependent reactions) are used to convert3-PGA into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). Some G3P is then used to build glucose.• Regeneration: The remaining G3P not used to synthesize glucose is used to regenerate RuBP, enabling thesystem to continue CO2 fixation. Three more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration reactions.The Calvin cycle is used extensively by plants and photoautotrophic bacteria, and the enzyme RuBisCO is said tobe the most plentiful enzyme on earth, composing 30%–50% of the total soluble protein in plant chloroplasts.[1]However, besides its prevalent use in photoautotrophs, the Calvin cycle is also used by many nonphotosyntheticchemoautotrophs to fix CO2. Additionally, other bacteria and archaea use alternative systems for CO2 fixation.Although most bacteria using Calvin cycle alternatives are chemoautotrophic, certain green sulfur photoautotrophicbacteria have been also shown to use an alternative CO2 fixation pathway.• Describe the three stages of the Calvin cycle.8.7 Biogeochemical CyclesLearning Objectives• Define and describe the importance of microorganisms in the biogeochemical cycles of carbon, nitrogen, andsulfur• Define and give an example of bioremediationEnergy flows directionally through ecosystems, entering as sunlight for phototrophs or as inorganic molecules forchemoautotrophs. The six most common elements associated with organic molecules—carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur—take a variety of chemical forms and may exist for long periods in the atmosphere,1. A. Dhingra et al. “Enhanced Translation of a Chloroplast-Expressed RbcS Gene Restores Small Subunit Levels and Photosynthesis inNuclear RbcS Antisense Plants.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 no. 16(2004):6315–6320.346 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5on land, in water, or beneath earth’s surface. Geologic processes, such as erosion, water drainage, the movementof the continental plates, and weathering, all are involved in the cycling of elements on earth. Because geologyand chemistry have major roles in the study of this process, the recycling of inorganic matter between livingorganisms and their nonliving environment is called a biogeochemical cycle. Here, we will focus on the function ofmicroorganisms in these cycles, which play roles at each step, most frequently interconverting oxidized versions ofmolecules with reduced ones.Carbon CycleCarbon is one of the most important elements to living organisms, as shown by its abundance and presence inall organic molecules. The carbon cycle exemplifies the connection between organisms in various ecosystems.Carbon is exchanged between heterotrophs and autotrophs within and between ecosystems primarily by way ofatmospheric CO2, a fully oxidized version of carbon that serves as the basic building block that autotrophs use to buildmulticarbon, high-energy organic molecules such as glucose. Photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs harness energyfrom the sun and from inorganic chemical compounds, respectively, to covalently bond carbon atoms together intoreduced organic compounds whose energy can be later accessed through the processes of respiration and fermentation(Figure 8.24).Overall, there is a constant exchange of CO2 between the heterotrophs (which produce CO2 as a result of respirationor fermentation) and the autotrophs (which use the CO2 for fixation). Autotrophs also respire or ferment, consumingthe organic molecules they form; they do not fix carbon for heterotrophs, but rather use it for their own metabolicneeds.Bacteria and archaea that use methane as their carbon source are called methanotrophs. Reduced one-carboncompounds like methane accumulate in certain anaerobic environments when CO2 is used as a terminal electronacceptor in anaerobic respiration by archaea called methanogens. Some methanogens also ferment acetate (twocarbons) to produce methane and CO2. Methane accumulation due to methanogenesis occurs in both natural anaerobicsoil and aquatic environments; methane accumulation also occurs as a result of animal husbandry becausemethanogens are members of the normal microbiota of ruminants. Environmental methane accumulation due tomethanogenesis is of consequence because it is a strong greenhouse gas, and methanotrophs help to reduceatmospheric methane levels.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 347Figure 8.24 This figure summarizes the carbon cycle. Eukaryotes participate in aerobic respiration, fermentation,and oxygenic photosynthesis. Prokaryotes participate in all the steps shown. (credit: modification of work by NOAA)• Describe the interaction between heterotrophs and autotrophs in the carbon cycle.Nitrogen CycleMany biological macromolecules, including proteins and nucleic acids, contain nitrogen; however, getting nitrogeninto living organisms is difficult. Prokaryotes play essential roles in the nitrogen cycle (Figure 8.25), transformingnitrogen between various forms for their own needs, benefiting other organisms indirectly. Plants and phytoplanktoncannot incorporate nitrogen from the atmosphere (where it exists as tightly bonded, triple covalent N2), even thoughthis molecule composes approximately 78% of the atmosphere. Nitrogen enters the living world through freelivingand symbiotic bacteria, which incorporate nitrogen into their macromolecules through specialized biochemicalpathways called nitrogen fixation. Cyanobacteria in aquatic ecosystems fix inorganic nitrogen (from nitrogen gas)into ammonia (NH3) that can be easily incorporated into biological macromolecules. Rhizobium bacteria (Figure8.1) also fix nitrogen and live symbiotically in the root nodules of legumes (such as beans, peanuts, and peas),providing them with needed organic nitrogen while receiving fixed carbon as sugar in exchange. Free-living bacteria,such as members of the genus Azotobacter, are also able to fix nitrogen.The nitrogen that enters living systems by nitrogen fixation is eventually converted from organic nitrogen back intonitrogen gas by microbes through three steps: ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification. In terrestrial systems,348 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the first step is the ammonification process, in which certain bacteria and fungi convert nitrogenous waste fromliving animals or from the remains of dead organisms into ammonia (NH3). This ammonia is then oxidized to nitrite⎛ ⎝NO2 −⎞ ⎠, then to nitrate ⎛ ⎝NO3 −⎞ ⎠, by nitrifying soil bacteria such as members of the genus Nitrosomonas, throughthe process of nitrification. Last, the process of denitrification occurs, whereby soil bacteria, such as members of thegenera Pseudomonas and Clostridium, use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration, convertingit into nitrogen gas that reenters the atmosphere. A similar process occurs in the marine nitrogen cycle, where thesethree processes are performed by marine bacteria and archaea.Human activity releases nitrogen into the environment by the use of artificial fertilizers that contain nitrogen andphosphorus compounds, which are then washed into lakes, rivers, and streams by surface runoff. A major effectfrom fertilizer runoff is saltwater and freshwater eutrophication, in which nutrient runoff causes the overgrowthand subsequent death of aquatic algae, making water sources anaerobic and inhospitable for the survival of aquaticorganisms.Figure 8.25 This figure summarizes the nitrogen cycle. Note that specific groups of prokaryotes each participate inevery step in the cycle. (credit: modification of work by NOAA)• What are the three steps of the nitrogen cycle?Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 349To learn more about the nitrogen cycle, visit the PBS (https://openstax.org/l/22nitrogencycle) website.Sulfur CycleSulfur is an essential element for the macromolecules of living organisms. As part of the amino acids cysteineand methionine, it is involved in the formation of proteins. It is also found in several vitamins necessary forthe synthesis of important biological molecules like coenzyme A. Several groups of microbes are responsible forcarrying out processes involved in the sulfur cycle (Figure 8.26). Anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria as well aschemoautotrophic archaea and bacteria use hydrogen sulfide as an electron donor, oxidizing it first to elemental sulfur(S0), then to sulfate ⎛⎝SO42 −⎞⎠. This leads to stratification of hydrogen sulfide in soil, with levels increasing at deeper,more anaerobic depths.Many bacteria and plants can use sulfate as a sulfur source. Decomposition dead organisms by fungi and bacteriaremove sulfur groups from amino acids, producing hydrogen sulfide, returning inorganic sulfur to the environment.Figure 8.26 This figure summarizes the sulfur cycle. Note that specific groups of prokaryotes each may participatein every step in the cycle. (credit: modification of work by NOAA)Link to Learning350 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Which groups of microbes carry out the sulfur cycle?Other Biogeochemical CyclesBeyond their involvement in the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles, prokaryotes are involved in other biogeochemicalcycles as well. Like the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles, several of these additional biogeochemical cycles, suchas the iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), and chromium (Cr) cycles, also involve redox chemistry, with prokaryotes playingroles in both oxidation and reduction. Several other elements undergo chemical cycles that do not involve redoxchemistry. Examples of these are phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), and silica (Si) cycles. The cycling of these elementsis particularly important in oceans because large quantities of these elements are incorporated into the exoskeletonsof marine organisms. These biogeochemical cycles do not involve redox chemistry but instead involve fluctuationsin the solubility of compounds containing calcium, phosphorous, and silica. The overgrowth of naturally occurringmicrobial communities is typically limited by the availability of nitrogen (as previously mentioned), phosphorus, andiron. Human activities introducing excessive amounts of iron, nitrogen, or phosphorus (typically from detergents)may lead to eutrophication.BioremediationMicrobial bioremediation leverages microbial metabolism to remove xenobiotics or other pollutants. Xenobioticsare compounds synthesized by humans and introduced into the environment in much higher concentrations thanwould naturally occur. Such environmental contamination may involve adhesives, dyes, flame retardants, lubricants,oil and petroleum products, organic solvents, pesticides, and products of the combustion of gasoline and oil. Manyxenobiotics resist breakdown, and some accumulate in the food chain after being consumed or absorbed by fishand wildlife, which, in turn, may be eaten by humans. Of particular concern are contaminants like polycyclicaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH), a carcinogenic xenobiotic found in crude oil, and trichloroethylene (TCE), a commongroundwater contaminant.Bioremediation processes can be categorized as in situ or ex situ. Bioremediation conducted at the site ofcontamination is called in situ bioremediation and does not involve movement of contaminated material. In contrast,ex situ bioremediation involves the removal of contaminated material from the original site so that it can be treatedelsewhere, typically in a large, lined pit where conditions are optimized for degradation of the contaminant.Some bioremediation processes rely on microorganisms that are indigenous to the contaminated site or material.Enhanced bioremediation techniques, which may be applied to either in situ or ex situ processing, involve theaddition of nutrients and/or air to encourage the growth of pollution-degrading microbes; they may also involve theaddition of non-native microbes known for their ability to degrade contaminants. For example, certain bacteria ofthe genera Rhodococcus and Pseudomonas are known for their ability to degrade many environmental contaminants,including aromatic compounds like those found in oil, down to CO2. The genes encoding their degradatory enzymesare commonly found on plasmids. Others, like Alcanivorax borkumensis, produce surfactants that are useful inthe solubilization of the hydrophobic molecules found in oil, making them more accessible to other microbes fordegradation.• Compare and contrast the benefits of in situ and ex situ bioremediation.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 351ResolutionAlthough there is a DNA test specific for Neisseria meningitidis, it is not practical for use in some developingcountries because it requires expensive equipment and a high level of expertise to perform. The hospital inBanjul was not equipped to perform DNA testing. Biochemical testing, however, is much less expensive and isstill effective for microbial identification.Fortunately for Hannah, her symptoms began to resolve with antibiotic therapy. Patients who survive bacterialmeningitis often suffer from long-term complications such as brain damage, hearing loss, and seizures, butafter several weeks of recovery, Hannah did not seem to be exhibiting any long-term effects and her behaviorreturned to normal. Because of her age, her parents were advised to monitor her closely for any signs ofdevelopmental issues and have her regularly evaluated by her pediatrician.N. meningitidis is found in the normal respiratory microbiota in 10%–20% of the human population.[2] In mostcases, it does not cause disease, but for reasons not fully understood, the bacterium can sometimes invade thebloodstream and cause infections in other areas of the body, including the brain. The disease is more commonin infants and children, like Hannah.The prevalence of meningitis caused by N. meningitidis is particularly high in the so-called meningitis belt, aregion of sub-Saharan African that includes 26 countries stretching from Senegal to Ethiopia (Figure 8.27).The reasons for this high prevalence are not clear, but several factors may contribute to higher rates oftransmission, such as the dry, dusty climate; overcrowding and low standards of living; and the relatively lowimmunocompetence and nutritional status of the population.[3] A vaccine against four bacterial strains of N.meningitidis is available. Vaccination is recommended for 11- and 12-year-old children, with a booster at age16 years. Vaccination is also recommended for young people who live in close quarters with others (e.g.,college dormitories, military barracks), where the disease is more easily transmitted. Travelers visiting the“meningitis belt” should also be vaccinated, especially during the dry season (December through June) whenthe prevalence is highest.[4][5]Figure 8.27 (a) Neisseria meningitidis is a gram-negative diplococcus, as shown in this gram-stainedsample. (b) The “meningitis belt” is the area of sub-Saharan Africa with high prevalence of meningitis causedby N. meningitidis. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Meningococcal Disease: Causes and Transmission.” http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/352 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Summary8.1 Energy, Matter, and Enzymes• Metabolism includes chemical reactions that break down complex molecules (catabolism) and those thatbuild complex molecules (anabolism).• Organisms may be classified according to their source of carbon. Autotrophs convert inorganic carbondioxide into organic carbon; heterotrophs use fixed organic carbon compounds.• Organisms may also be classified according to their energy source. Phototrophs obtain their energy fromlight. Chemotrophs get their energy from chemical compounds. Organotrophs use organic molecules, andlithotrophs use inorganic chemicals.• Cellular electron carriers accept high-energy electrons from foods and later serve as electron donors insubsequent redox reactions. FAD/FADH2, NAD+/NADH, and NADP+/NADPH are important electroncarriers.• Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) serves as the energy currency of the cell, safely storing chemical energy inits two high-energy phosphate bonds for later use to drive processes requiring energy.• Enzymes are biological catalysts that increase the rate of chemical reactions inside cells by lowering theactivation energy required for the reaction to proceed.• In nature, exergonic reactions do not require energy beyond activation energy to proceed, and they releaseenergy. They may proceed without enzymes, but at a slow rate. Conversely, endergonic reactions requireenergy beyond activation energy to occur. In cells, endergonic reactions are coupled to exergonic reactions,making the combination energetically favorable.• Substrates bind to the enzyme’s active site. This process typically alters the structures of both the active siteand the substrate, favoring transition-state formation; this is known as induced fit.• Cofactors are inorganic ions that stabilize enzyme conformation and function. Coenzymes are organicmolecules required for proper enzyme function and are often derived from vitamins. An enzyme lacking acofactor or coenzyme is an apoenzyme; an enzyme with a bound cofactor or coenzyme is a holoenzyme.• Competitive inhibitors regulate enzymes by binding to an enzyme’s active site, preventing substrate binding.Noncompetitive (allosteric) inhibitors bind to allosteric sites, inducing a conformational change in theenzyme that prevents it from functioning. Feedback inhibition occurs when the product of a metabolicpathway noncompetitively binds to an enzyme early on in the pathway, ultimately preventing the synthesis ofthe product.8.2 Catabolism of Carbohydrates• Glycolysis is the first step in the breakdown of glucose, resulting in the formation of ATP, which is producedby substrate-level phosphorylation; NADH; and two pyruvate molecules. Glycolysis does not use oxygenand is not oxygen dependent.• After glycolysis, a three-carbon pyruvate is decarboxylated to form a two-carbon acetyl group, coupled withthe formation of NADH. The acetyl group is attached to a large carrier compound called coenzyme A.• After the transition step, coenzyme A transports the two-carbon acetyl to the Krebs cycle, where the twocarbons enter the cycle. Per turn of the cycle, one acetyl group derived from glycolysis is further oxidized,producing three NADH molecules, one FADH2, and one ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation, andreleasing two CO2 molecules.• The Krebs cycle may be used for other purposes. Many of the intermediates are used to synthesize importantabout/causes-transmission.html. Accessed September 12, 2016.3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Meningococcal Disease in Other Countries.” http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/global.html. Accessed September 12, 2016.4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Health Information for Travelers to the Gambia: Traveler View.” http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/destinations/traveler/none/the-gambia. Accessed September 12, 2016.5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Meningococcal: Who Needs to Be Vaccinated?” http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/mening/who-vaccinate.htm. Accessed September 12, 2016.Chapter 8 | Microbial Metabolism 353cellular molecules, including amino acids, chlorophylls, fatty acids, and nucleotides.8.3 Cellular Respiration• Most ATP generated during the cellular respiration of glucose is made by oxidative phosphorylation.• An electron transport system (ETS) is composed of a series of membrane-associated protein complexesand associated mobile accessory electron carriers. The ETS is embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane ofprokaryotes and the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes.• Each ETS complex has a different redox potential, and electrons move from electron carriers with morenegative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential.• To carry out aerobic respiration, a cell requires oxygen as the final electron acceptor. A cell also needs acomplete Krebs cycle, an appropriate cytochrome oxidase, and oxygen detoxification enzymes to prevent theharmful effects of oxygen radicals produced during aerobic respiration.• Organisms performing anaerobic respiration use alternative electron transport system carriers for theultimate transfer of electrons to the final non-oxygen electron acceptors.• Microbes show great variation in the composition of their electron transport systems, which can be used fordiagnostic purposes to help identify certain pathogens.• As electrons are passed from NADH and FADH2 through an ETS, the electron loses energy. This energy isstored through the pumping of H+ across the membrane, generating a proton motive force.• The energy of this proton motive force can be harnessed by allowing hydrogen ions to diffuse back throughthe membrane by chemiosmosis using ATP synthase. As hydrogen ions diffuse through down theirelectrochemical gradient, components of ATP synthase spin, making ATP from ADP and Pi by oxidativephosphorylation.• Aerobic respiration forms more ATP (a maximum of 34 ATP molecules) during oxidative phosphorylationthan does anaerobic respiration (between one and 32 ATP molecules).8.4 Fermentation• Fermentation uses an organic molecule as a final electron acceptor to regenerate NAD+ from NADH so thatglycolysis can continue.• Fermentation does not involve an electron transport system, and no ATP is made by the fermentation processdirectly. Fermenters make very little ATP—only two ATP molecules per glucose molecule during glycolysis.• Microbial fermentation processes have been used for the production of foods and pharmaceuticals, and for theidentification of microbes.• During lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate accepts electrons from NADH and is reduced to lactic acid.Microbes performing homolactic fermentation produce only lactic acid as the fermentation product;microbes performing heterolactic fermentation produce a mixture of lactic acid, ethanol and/or acetic acid,and CO2.• Lactic acid production by the normal microbiota prevents growth of pathogens in certain body regions and isimportant for the health of the gastrointestinal tract.• During ethanol fermentation, pyruvate is first decarboxylated (releasing CO2) to acetaldehyde, which thenaccepts electrons from NADH, reducing acetaldehyde to ethanol. Ethanol fermentation is used for theproduction of alcoholic beverages, for making bread products rise, and for biofuel production.• Fermentation products of pathways (e.g., propionic acid fermentation) provide distinctive flavors to foodproducts. Fermentation is used to produce chemical solvents (acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation) andpharmaceuticals (mixed acid fermentation).• Specific types of microbes may be distinguished by their fermentation pathways and products. Microbes mayalso be differentiated according to the substrates they are able to ferment.8.5 Catabolism of Lipids and Proteins• Collectively, microbes have the ability to degrade a wide variety of carbon sources besides carbohydrates,including lipids and proteins. The catabolic pathways for all of these molecules eventually connect into354 Chapter 8 | Microbial MetabolismThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5glycolysis and the Krebs cycle.• Several types of lipids can be microbially degraded. Triglycerides are degraded by extracellular lipases,releasing fatty acids from the glycerol backbone. Phospholipids are degraded by phospholipases, releasingfatty acids and the phosphorylated head group from the glycerol backbone. Lipases and phospholipases act asvirulence factors for certain pathogenic microbes.• Fatty acids can be further degraded inside the cell through β-oxidation, which sequentially removes twocarbonacetyl groups from the ends of fatty acid chains.• Protein degradation involves extracellular proteases that degrade large proteins into smaller peptides.Detection of the extracellular proteases gelatinase and caseinase can be used to differentiate clinically relevantbacteria.8.6 Photosynthesis• Heterotrophs depend on the carbohydrates produced by autotrophs, many of which are photosynthetic,converting solar energy into chemical energy.• Different photosynthetic organisms use different mixtures of photosynthetic pigments, which increase therange of the wavelengths of light an organism can absorb.• Photosystems (PSI and PSII) each contain a light-harvesting complex, composed of multiple proteins andassociated pigments that absorb light energy. The light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis convert solarenergy into chemical energy, producing ATP and NADPH or NADH to temporarily store this energy.• In oxygenic photosynthesis, H2O serves as the electron donor to replace the reaction center electron, andoxygen is formed as a byproduct. In anoxygenic photosynthesis, other reduced molecules like H2S orthiosulfate may be used as the electron donor; as such, oxygen is not formed as a byproduct.• Noncyclic photophosphorylation is used in oxygenic photosynthesis when there is a need for both ATP andNADPH production. If a cell’s needs for ATP outweigh its needs for NADPH, then it may carry out cyclicphotophosphorylation instead, producing only ATP.• The light-independent reactions of photosynthesis use the ATP and NADPH from the light-dependentreactions to fix CO2 into organic sugar molecules.8.7 Biogeochemical Cycles• The recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their nonliving environment is called abiogeochemical cycle. Microbes play significant roles in these cycles.• In the carbon cycle, heterotrophs degrade reduced organic molecule to produce carbon dioxide, whereasautotrophs fix carbon dioxide to produce organics. Methanogens typically form methane by using CO2 asa final electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration; methanotrophs oxidize the methane, using it as theircarbon source.• In the nitrogen cycle, nitrogen-fixing bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia (ammonification).The ammonia can then be oxidized to nitrite and nitrate (nitrification). Nitrates can then be assimilated byplants. Soil bacteria convert nitrate back to nitrogen gas (denitrification).• In sulfur cycling, many anoxygenic photosynthesizers and chemoautotrophs use hydrogen sulfide as anelectron donor, producing elemental sulfur and then sulfate; sulfate-reducing bacteria and archaea then usesulfate as a final electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration, converting it back to hydrogen sulfide.• Human activities that introduce excessive amounts of naturally limited nutrients (like iron, nitrogen, orphosphorus) to aquatic systems may lead to eutrophication.• Microbial bioremediation is the use of microbial metabolism to remove or degrade xenobiotics and otherenvironmental contaminants and pollutants. Enhanced bioremediation techniques may involve theintroduction of non-native microbes specifically chosen or engineered for their ability to degradecontaminants.