Chapter 4Prokaryotic DiversityFigure 4.1 The bacterium Shewanella lives in the deep sea, where there is little oxygen diffused in the water. It isable to survive in this harsh environment by attaching to the sea floor and using long appendages, called“nanocables,” to sense oxygen. (credit a: modification of work by NASA; credit b: modification of work by Liza Gross)Chapter Outline4.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes4.2 Proteobacteria4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria4.4 Gram-Positive Bacteria4.5 Deeply Branching Bacteria4.6 ArchaeaIntroductionScientists have studied prokaryotes for centuries, but it wasn’t until 1966 that scientist Thomas Brock (1926–)discovered that certain bacteria can live in boiling water. This led many to wonder whether prokaryotes may also livein other extreme environments, such as at the bottom of the ocean, at high altitudes, or inside volcanoes, or even onother planets.Prokaryotes have an important role in changing, shaping, and sustaining the entire biosphere. They can produceproteins and other substances used by molecular biologists in basic research and in medicine and industry. Forexample, the bacterium Shewanella lives in the deep sea, where oxygen is scarce. It grows long appendages, whichhave special sensors used to seek the limited oxygen in its environment. It can also digest toxic waste and generateelectricity. Other species of prokaryotes can produce more oxygen than the entire Amazon rainforest, while still otherssupply plants, animals, and humans with usable forms of nitrogen; and inhabit our body, protecting us from harmfulmicroorganisms and producing some vitally important substances. This chapter will examine the diversity, structure,and function of prokaryotes.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 1494.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and MicrobiomesLearning Objectives• Identify and describe unique examples of prokaryotes in various habitats on earth• Identify and describe symbiotic relationships• Compare normal/commensal/resident microbiota to transient microbiota• Explain how prokaryotes are classifiedAll living organisms are classified into three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. In this chapter, wewill focus on the domains Archaea and Bacteria. Archaea and bacteria are unicellular prokaryotic organisms. Unlikeeukaryotes, they have no nuclei or any other membrane-bound organelles.Prokaryote Habitats and FunctionsProkaryotes are ubiquitous. They can be found everywhere on our planet, even in hot springs, in the Antarctic iceshield, and under extreme pressure two miles under water. One bacterium, Paracoccus denitrificans, has even beenshown to survive when scientists removed it from its native environment (soil) and used a centrifuge to subject it toforces of gravity as strong as those found on the surface of Jupiter.Prokaryotes also are abundant on and within the human body. According to a report by National Institutes of Health,prokaryotes, especially bacteria, outnumber human cells 10:1.[1] More recent studies suggest the ratio could be closerto 1:1, but even that ratio means that there are a great number of bacteria within the human body.[2] Bacteria thrive inthe human mouth, nasal cavity, throat, ears, gastrointestinal tract, and vagina. Large colonies of bacteria can be foundon healthy human skin, especially in moist areas (armpits, navel, and areas behind ears). However, even drier areas ofthe skin are not free from bacteria.Part 1Marsha, a 20-year-old university student, recently returned to the United States from a trip to Nigeria, whereshe had interned as a medical assistant for an organization working to improve access to laboratory servicesfor tuberculosis testing. When she returned, Marsha began to feel fatigue, which she initially attributed to jetlag. However, the fatigue persisted, and Marsha soon began to experience other bothersome symptoms, suchas occasional coughing, night sweats, loss of appetite, and a low-grade fever of 37.4 °C (99.3 °F).Marsha expected her symptoms would subside in a few days, but instead, they gradually became more severe.About two weeks after returning home, she coughed up some sputum and noticed that it contained blood andsmall whitish clumps resembling cottage cheese. Her fever spiked to 38.2 °C (100.8 °F), and she began feelingsharp pains in her chest when breathing deeply. Concerned that she seemed to be getting worse, Marshascheduled an appointment with her physician.• Could Marsha’s symptoms be related to her overseas travel, even several weeks after returning home?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1. Medical Press. “Mouth Bacteria Can Change Their Diet, Supercomputers Reveal.” August 12, 2014. http://medicalxpress.com/news/2014-08-mouth-bacteria-diet-supercomputers-reveal.html. Accessed February 24, 2015.2. A. Abbott. “Scientists Bust Myth That Our Bodies Have More Bacteria Than Human Cells: Decades-Old Assumption about MicrobiotaRevisited.” Nature. http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-bust-myth-that-our-bodies-have-more-bacteria-than-human-cells-1.19136.Accessed June 3, 2016.150 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The existence of prokaryotes is very important for the stability and thriving of ecosystems. For example, they are anecessary part of soil formation and stabilization processes through the breakdown of organic matter and developmentof biofilms. One gram of soil contains up to 10 billion microorganisms (most of them prokaryotic) belonging to about1,000 species. Many species of bacteria use substances released from plant roots, such as acids and carbohydrates,as nutrients. The bacteria metabolize these plant substances and release the products of bacterial metabolism backto the soil, forming humus and thus increasing the soil’s fertility. In salty lakes such as the Dead Sea (Figure 4.2),salt-loving halobacteria decompose dead brine shrimp and nourish young brine shrimp and flies with the products ofbacterial metabolism.Figure 4.2 (a) Some prokaryotes, called halophiles, can thrive in extremely salty environments such as the DeadSea, pictured here. (b) The archaeon Halobacterium salinarum, shown here in an electron micrograph, is a halophilethat lives in the Dead Sea. (credit a: modification of work by Jullen Menichini; credit b: modification of work by NASA)In addition to living in the ground and the water, prokaryotic microorganisms are abundant in the air, even high in theatmosphere. There may be up to 2,000 different kinds of bacteria in the air, similar to their diversity in the soil.Prokaryotes can be found everywhere on earth because they are extremely resilient and adaptable. They are oftenmetabolically flexible, which means that they might easily switch from one energy source to another, dependingon the availability of the sources, or from one metabolic pathway to another. For example, certain prokaryoticcyanobacteria can switch from a conventional type of lipid metabolism, which includes production of fatty aldehydes,to a different type of lipid metabolism that generates biofuel, such as fatty acids and wax esters. Groundwater bacteriastore complex high-energy carbohydrates when grown in pure groundwater, but they metabolize these moleculeswhen the groundwater is enriched with phosphates. Some bacteria get their energy by reducing sulfates into sulfides,but can switch to a different metabolic pathway when necessary, producing acids and free hydrogen ions.Prokaryotes perform functions vital to life on earth by capturing (or “fixing”) and recycling elements like carbonand nitrogen. Organisms such as animals require organic carbon to grow, but, unlike prokaryotes, they are unable touse inorganic carbon sources like carbon dioxide. Thus, animals rely on prokaryotes to convert carbon dioxide intoorganic carbon products that they can use. This process of converting carbon dioxide to organic carbon products iscalled carbon fixation.Plants and animals also rely heavily on prokaryotes for nitrogen fixation, the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen intoammonia, a compound that some plants can use to form many different biomolecules necessary to their survival.Bacteria in the genus Rhizobium, for example, are nitrogen-fixing bacteria; they live in the roots of legume plantssuch as clover, alfalfa, and peas (Figure 4.3). Ammonia produced by Rhizobium helps these plants to survive byenabling them to make building blocks of nucleic acids. In turn, these plants may be eaten by animals—sustainingtheir growth and survival—or they may die, in which case the products of nitrogen fixation will enrich the soil and beused by other plants.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 151Figure 4.3 (a) Nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as Rhizobium live in the root nodules of legumes such as clover. (b)This micrograph of the root nodule shows bacteroids (bacterium-like cells or modified bacterial cells) within the plantcells. The bacteroids are visible as darker ovals within the larger plant cell. (credit a: modification of work by USDA)Another positive function of prokaryotes is in cleaning up the environment. Recently, some researchers focused onthe diversity and functions of prokaryotes in manmade environments. They found that some bacteria play a uniquerole in degrading toxic chemicals that pollute water and soil.[3]Despite all of the positive and helpful roles prokaryotes play, some are human pathogens that may cause illness orinfection when they enter the body. In addition, some bacteria can contaminate food, causing spoilage or foodborneillness, which makes them subjects of concern in food preparation and safety. Less than 1% of prokaryotes (all ofthem bacteria) are thought to be human pathogens, but collectively these species are responsible for a large numberof the diseases that afflict humans.Besides pathogens, which have a direct impact on human health, prokaryotes also affect humans in many indirectways. For example, prokaryotes are now thought to be key players in the processes of climate change. In recent years,as temperatures in the earth’s polar regions have risen, soil that was formerly frozen year-round (permafrost) hasbegun to thaw. Carbon trapped in the permafrost is gradually released and metabolized by prokaryotes. This producesmassive amounts of carbon dioxide and methane, greenhouse gases that escape into the atmosphere and contribute tothe greenhouse effect.• In what types of environments can prokaryotes be found?• Name some ways that plants and animals rely on prokaryotes.Symbiotic RelationshipsAs we have learned, prokaryotic microorganisms can associate with plants and animals. Often, this association resultsin unique relationships between organisms. For example, bacteria living on the roots or leaves of a plant get nutrientsfrom the plant and, in return, produce substances that protect the plant from pathogens. On the other hand, somebacteria are plant pathogens that use mechanisms of infection similar to bacterial pathogens of animals and humans.Prokaryotes live in a community, or a group of interacting populations of organisms. A population is a group ofindividual organisms belonging to the same biological species and limited to a certain geographic area. Populations3. A.M. Kravetz “Unique Bacteria Fights Man-Made Chemical Waste.” 2012. http://www.livescience.com/25181-bacteria-strain-cleans-uptoxins-nsf-bts.html. Accessed March 9, 2015.152 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5can have cooperative interactions, which benefit the populations, or competitive interactions, in which onepopulation competes with another for resources. The study of these interactions between microbial populations andtheir environment is called microbial ecology.Any interaction between different species that are associated with each other within a community is called symbiosis.Such interactions fall along a continuum between opposition and cooperation. Interactions in a symbiotic relationshipmay be beneficial or harmful, or have no effect on one or both of the species involved. Table 4.1 summarizes themain types of symbiotic interactions among prokaryotes.Types of Symbiotic RelationshipsType Population A Population BMutualism Benefitted BenefittedAmensalism Harmed UnaffectedCommensalism Benefitted UnaffectedNeutralism Unaffected UnaffectedParasitism Benefitted HarmedTable 4.1When two species benefit from each other, the symbiosis is called mutualism (or syntropy, or crossfeeding). Forexample, humans have a mutualistic relationship with the bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which lives in theintestinal tract. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron digests complex polysaccharide plant materials that human digestiveenzymes cannot break down, converting them into monosaccharides that can be absorbed by human cells. Humansalso have a mutualistic relationship with certain strains of Escherichia coli, another bacterium found in the gut. E.coli relies on intestinal contents for nutrients, and humans derive certain vitamins from E. coli, particularly vitaminK, which is required for the formation of blood clotting factors. (This is only true for some strains of E. coli, however.Other strains are pathogenic and do not have a mutualistic relationship with humans.)A type of symbiosis in which one population harms another but remains unaffected itself is called amensalism.In the case of bacteria, some amensalist species produce bactericidal substances that kill other species of bacteria.The microbiota of the skin is composed of a variety of bacterial species, including Staphylococcus epidermidis andPropionibacterium acnes. Although both species have the potential to cause infectious diseases when protectivebarriers are breached, they both produce a variety of antibacterial bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds. S.epidermidis and P. acnes are unaffected by the bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds they produce, but thesecompounds can target and kill other potential pathogens.In another type of symbiosis, called commensalism, one organism benefits while the other is unaffected. This occurswhen the bacterium Staphylococcus epidermidis uses the dead cells of the human skin as nutrients. Billions of thesebacteria live on our skin, but in most cases (especially when our immune system is healthy), we do not react to themin any way. S. epidermidis provides an excellent example of how the classifications of symbiotic relationships arenot always distinct. One could also consider the symbiotic relationship of S. epidermidis with humans as mutualism.Humans provide a food source of dead skin cells to the bacterium, and in turn the production of bacteriocin canprovide an defense against potential pathogens.If neither of the symbiotic organisms is affected in any way, we call this type of symbiosis neutralism. An exampleof neutralism is the coexistence of metabolically active (vegetating) bacteria and endospores (dormant, metabolicallypassive bacteria). For example, the bacterium Bacillus anthracis typically forms endospores in soil when conditionsare unfavorable. If the soil is warmed and enriched with nutrients, some B. anthracis endospores germinate andremain in symbiosis with other species of endospores that have not germinated.A type of symbiosis in which one organism benefits while harming the other is called parasitism. The relationshipChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 153between humans and many pathogenic prokaryotes can be characterized as parasitic because these organisms invadethe body, producing toxic substances or infectious diseases that cause harm. Diseases such as tetanus, diphtheria,pertussis, tuberculosis, and leprosy all arise from interactions between bacteria and humans.Scientists have coined the term microbiome to refer to all prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms that areassociated with a certain organism or environment.Within the human microbiome, there are resident microbiota andtransient microbiota. The resident microbiota consists of microorganisms that constantly live in or on our bodies.The term transient microbiota refers to microorganisms that are only temporarily found in the human body, and thesemay include pathogenic microorganisms. Hygiene and diet can alter both the resident and transient microbiota.The resident microbiota is amazingly diverse, not only in terms of the variety of species but also in terms of thepreference of different microorganisms for different areas of the human body. For example, in the human mouth, thereare thousands of commensal or mutualistic species of bacteria. Some of these bacteria prefer to inhabit the surface ofthe tongue, whereas others prefer the internal surface of the cheeks, and yet others prefer the front or back teeth orgums. The inner surface of the cheek has the least diverse microbiota because of its exposure to oxygen. By contrast,the crypts of the tongue and the spaces between teeth are two sites with limited oxygen exposure, so these siteshave more diverse microbiota, including bacteria living in the absence of oxygen (e.g., Bacteroides, Fusobacterium).Differences in the oral microbiota between randomly chosen human individuals are also significant. Studies haveshown, for example, that the prevalence of such bacteria as Streptococcus, Haemophilus, Neisseria, and others wasdramatically different when compared between individuals.[4]There are also significant differences between the microbiota of different sites of the same human body. The innersurface of the cheek has a predominance of Streptococcus, whereas in the throat, the palatine tonsil, and saliva, thereare two to three times fewer Streptococcus, and several times more Fusobacterium. In the plaque removed fromgums, the predominant bacteria belong to the genus Fusobacterium. However, in the intestine, both Streptococcusand Fusobacterium disappear, and the genus Bacteroides becomes predominant.Not only can the microbiota vary from one body site to another, the microbiome can also change over time within thesame individual. Humans acquire their first inoculations of normal flora during natural birth and shortly after birth.Before birth, there is a rapid increase in the population of Lactobacillus spp. in the vagina, and this population servesas the first colonization of microbiota during natural birth. After birth, additional microbes are acquired from healthcareproviders, parents, other relatives, and individuals who come in contact with the baby. This process establishesa microbiome that will continue to evolve over the course of the individual’s life as new microbes colonize and areeliminated from the body. For example, it is estimated that within a 9-hour period, the microbiota of the small intestinecan change so that half of the microbial inhabitants will be different.[5] The importance of the initial Lactobacilluscolonization during vaginal child birth is highlighted by studies demonstrating a higher incidence of diseases inindividuals born by cesarean section, compared to those born vaginally. Studies have shown that babies born vaginallyare predominantly colonized by vaginal lactobacillus, whereas babies born by cesarean section are more frequentlycolonized by microbes of the normal skin microbiota, including common hospital-acquired pathogens.Throughout the body, resident microbiotas are important for human health because they occupy niches that might beotherwise taken by pathogenic microorganisms. For instance, Lactobacillus spp. are the dominant bacterial speciesof the normal vaginal microbiota for most women. lactobacillus produce lactic acid, contributing to the acidity ofthe vagina and inhibiting the growth of pathogenic yeasts. However, when the population of the resident microbiotais decreased for some reason (e.g., because of taking antibiotics), the pH of the vagina increases, making it a morefavorable environment for the growth of yeasts such as Candida albicans. Antibiotic therapy can also disrupt themicrobiota of the intestinal tract and respiratory tract, increasing the risk for secondary infections and/or promotingthe long-term carriage and shedding of pathogens.4. E.M. Bik et al. “Bacterial Diversity in the Oral Cavity of 10 Healthy Individuals.” The ISME Journal 4 no. 8 (2010):962–974.5. C.C. Booijink et al. “High Temporal and Intra-Individual Variation Detected in the Human Ileal Microbiota.” EnvironmentalMicrobiology 12 no. 12 (2010):3213–3227.154 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain the difference between cooperative and competitive interactions in microbial communities.• List the types of symbiosis and explain how each population is affected.Taxonomy and SystematicsAssigning prokaryotes to a certain species is challenging. They do not reproduce sexually, so it is not possible toclassify them according to the presence or absence of interbreeding. Also, they do not have many morphologicalfeatures. Traditionally, the classification of prokaryotes was based on their shape, staining patterns, and biochemicalor physiological differences. More recently, as technology has improved, the nucleotide sequences in genes havebecome an important criterion of microbial classification.In 1923, American microbiologist David Hendricks Bergey (1860–1937) published A Manual in DeterminativeBacteriology. With this manual, he attempted to summarize the information about the kinds of bacteria known at thattime, using Latin binomial classification. Bergey also included the morphological, physiological, and biochemicalproperties of these organisms. His manual has been updated multiple times to include newer bacteria and theirproperties. It is a great aid in bacterial taxonomy and methods of characterization of bacteria. A more recent sisterpublication, the five-volume Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, expands on Bergey’s original manual. Itincludes a large number of additional species, along with up-to-date descriptions of the taxonomy and biologicalproperties of all named prokaryotic taxa. This publication incorporates the approved names of bacteria as determinedby the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN).Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology is now available(https://openstax.org/l/22mandeterbact) online. You can also access asearchable database (https://openstax.org/l/22databmicrefst) of microbialreference strains, published by the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC).Classification by Staining PatternsAccording to their staining patterns, which depend on the properties of their cell walls, bacteria have traditionallybeen classified into gram-positive, gram-negative, and “atypical,” meaning neither gram-positive nor gram-negative.As explained in Staining Microscopic Specimens, gram-positive bacteria possess a thick peptidoglycan cellwall that retains the primary stain (crystal violet) during the decolorizing step; they remain purple after the gramstainprocedure because the crystal violet dominates the light red/pink color of the secondary counterstain, safranin.In contrast, gram-negative bacteria possess a thin peptidoglycan cell wall that does not prevent the crystal violetfrom washing away during the decolorizing step; therefore, they appear light red/pink after staining with the safranin.Bacteria that cannot be stained by the standard Gram stain procedure are called atypical bacteria. Included in theatypical category are species of Mycoplasma and Chlamydia. Rickettsia are also considered atypical because they aretoo small to be evaluated by the Gram stain.More recently, scientists have begun to further classify gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. They have addeda special group of deeply branching bacteria based on a combination of physiological, biochemical, and geneticfeatures. They also now further classify gram-negative bacteria into Proteobacteria, Cytophaga-Flavobacterium-Bacteroides (CFB), and spirochetes.The deeply branching bacteria are thought to be a very early evolutionary form of bacteria (see Deeply BranchingLink to LearningChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 155Bacteria). They live in hot, acidic, ultraviolet-light-exposed, and anaerobic (deprived of oxygen) conditions.Proteobacteria is a phylum of very diverse groups of gram-negative bacteria; it includes some important humanpathogens (e.g., E. coli and Bordetella pertussis). The CFB group of bacteria includes components of the normalhuman gut microbiota, like Bacteroides. The spirochetes are spiral-shaped bacteria and include the pathogenTreponema pallidum, which causes syphilis. We will characterize these groups of bacteria in more detail later in thechapter.Based on their prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides, gram-positive bacteria are also classified into lowG+C and high G+C gram-positive bacteria. The low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50% of guanineand cytosine nucleotides in their DNA. They include human pathogens, such as those that cause anthrax (Bacillusanthracis), tetanus (Clostridium tetani), and listeriosis (Listeria monocytogenes). High G+C gram-positive bacteria,which have more than 50% guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA, include the bacteria that cause diphtheria(Corynebacterium diphtheriae), tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis), and other diseases.The classifications of prokaryotes are constantly changing as new species are being discovered.We will describe themin more detail, along with the diseases they cause, in later sections and chapters.• How do scientists classify prokaryotes?Human Microbiome ProjectThe Human Microbiome Project was launched by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in 2008. One main goalof the project is to create a large repository of the gene sequences of important microbes found in humans,helping biologists and clinicians understand the dynamics of the human microbiome and the relationshipbetween the human microbiota and diseases. A network of labs working together has been compiling the datafrom swabs of several areas of the skin, gut, and mouth from hundreds of individuals.One of the challenges in understanding the human microbiome has been the difficulty of culturing many of themicrobes that inhabit the human body. It has been estimated that we are only able to culture 1% of the bacteriain nature and that we are unable to grow the remaining 99%. To address this challenge, researchers haveused metagenomic analysis, which studies genetic material harvested directly from microbial communities, asopposed to that of individual species grown in a culture. This allows researchers to study the genetic materialof all microbes in the microbiome, rather than just those that can be cultured.[6]One important achievement of the Human Microbiome Project is establishing the first reference database onmicroorganisms living in and on the human body. Many of the microbes in the microbiome are beneficial, butsome are not. It was found, somewhat unexpectedly, that all of us have some serious microbial pathogens inour microbiota. For example, the conjunctiva of the human eye contains 24 genera of bacteria and numerouspathogenic species.[7] A healthy human mouth contains a number of species of the genus Streptococcus,including pathogenic species S. pyogenes and S. pneumoniae.[8] This raises the question of why certainprokaryotic organisms exist commensally in certain individuals but act as deadly pathogens in others. Alsounexpected was the number of organisms that had never been cultured. For example, in one metagenomicstudy of the human gut microbiota, 174 new species of bacteria were identified.[9]Another goal for the near future is to characterize the human microbiota in patients with different diseases andto find out whether there are any relationships between the contents of an individual’s microbiota and risk foror susceptibility to specific diseases. Analyzing the microbiome in a person with a specific disease may revealnew ways to fight diseases.Micro Connections156 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.54.2 ProteobacteriaLearning Objectives• Describe the unique features of each class within the phylum Proteobacteria: Alphaproteobacteria,Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Epsilonproteobacteria• Give an example of a bacterium in each class of ProteobacteriaIn 1987, the American microbiologist Carl Woese (1928–2012) suggested that a large and diverse group of bacteriathat he called “purple bacteria and their relatives” should be defined as a separate phylum within the domainBacteria based on the similarity of the nucleotide sequences in their genome.[10] This phylum of gram-negativebacteria subsequently received the name Proteobacteria. It includes many bacteria that are part of the normal humanmicrobiota as well as many pathogens. The Proteobacteria are further divided into five classes: Alphaproteobacteria,Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Epsilonproteobacteria (Appendix D).AlphaproteobacteriaThe first class of Proteobacteria is the Alphaproteobacteria. The unifying characteristic of this class is that they areoligotrophs, organisms capable of living in low-nutrient environments such as deep oceanic sediments, glacial ice, ordeep undersurface soil.Among the Alphaproteobacteria are two taxa, chlamydias and rickettsias, that are obligate intracellular pathogens,meaning that part of their life cycle must occur inside other cells called host cells. When not growing inside a hostcell, Chlamydia and Rickettsia are metabolically inactive outside of the host cell. They cannot synthesize their ownadenosine triphosphate (ATP), and, therefore, rely on cells for their energy needs.Rickettsia spp. include a number of serious human pathogens. For example, R. rickettsii causes Rocky Mountainspotted fever, a life-threatening form of meningoencephalitis (inflammation of the membranes that wrap the brain).R. rickettsii infects ticks and can be transmitted to humans via a bite from an infected tick (Figure 4.4).6. National Institutes of Health. “Human Microbiome Project. Overview.” http://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/overview. Accessed June 7,2016.7. Q. Dong et al. “Diversity of Bacteria at Healthy Human Conjunctiva.” Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 52 no. 8(2011):5408–5413.8. F.E. Dewhirst et al. “The Human Oral Microbiome.” Journal of Bacteriology 192 no. 19 (2010):5002–5017.9. J.C. Lagier et al. “Microbial Culturomics: Paradigm Shift in the Human Gut Microbiome Study.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 18no. 12 (2012):1185–1193.10. C.R. Woese. “Bacterial Evolution.” Microbiological Review 51 no. 2 (1987):221–271.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 157Figure 4.4 Rickettsias require special staining methods to see them under a microscope. Here, R. rickettsii, whichcauses Rocky Mountain spotted fever, is shown infecting the cells of a tick. (credit: modification of work by Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention)Another species of Rickettsia, R. prowazekii, is spread by lice. It causes epidemic typhus, a severe infectious diseasecommon during warfare and mass migrations of people. R. prowazekii infects human endothelium cells, causinginflammation of the inner lining of blood vessels, high fever, abdominal pain, and sometimes delirium. A relative, R.typhi, causes a less severe disease known as murine or endemic typhus, which is still observed in the southwesternUnited States during warm seasons.Chlamydia is another taxon of the Alphaproteobacteria. Members of this genus are gram-negative, obligateintracellular pathogens that are extremely resistant to the cellular defenses, giving them the ability to spread fromhost to host rapidly via elementary bodies. The metabolically and reproductively inactive elementary bodies arethe endospore-like form of intracellular bacteria that enter an epithelial cell, where they become active. Figure 4.5illustrates the life cycle of Chlamydia.C. trachomatis is a human pathogen that causes trachoma, a disease of the eyes, often leading to blindness. C.trachomatis also causes the sexually transmitted disease lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV). This disease is oftenmildly symptomatic, manifesting as regional lymph node swelling, or it may be asymptomatic, but it is extremelycontagious and is common on college campuses.Table 4.2 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Alphaproteobacteria.158 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.5 Chlamydia begins infection of a host when the metabolically inactive elementary bodies enter anepithelial cell. Once inside the host cell, the elementary bodies turn into active reticulate bodies. The reticulate bodiesmultiply and release more elementary bodies when the cell dies after the Chlamydia uses all of the host cell’s ATP.(credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Class AlphaproteobacteriaGenus MicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsAgrobacterium Gram-negative bacillus Plant pathogen; one species, A. tumefaciens, causes tumors inplantsBartonella Gram-negative,pleomorphic, flagellatedcoccobacillusFacultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by lice and fleas,cause trench fever and cat scratch disease in humansBrucella Gram-negative, small,flagellated coccobacillusFacultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by contaminatedmilk from infected cows, cause brucellosis in cattle andhumansCaulobacter Gram-negative bacillus Used in studies on cellular adaptation and differentiationbecause of its peculiar life cycle (during cell division, forms“swarm” cells and “stalked” cells)Table 4.2Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 159Class AlphaproteobacteriaGenus MicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsChlamydia Gram-negative, coccoidor ovoid bacteriumObligatory intracellular bacteria; some cause chlamydia,trachoma, and pneumoniaCoxiella Small, gram-negativebacillusObligatory intracellular bacteria; cause Q fever; potential foruse as biological weaponEhrlichia Very small, gramnegative,coccoid orovoid bacteriaObligatory intracellular bacteria; can be transported from cell tocell; transmitted by ticks; cause ehrlichiosis (destruction ofwhite blood cells and inflammation) in humans and dogsHyphomicrobium Gram-negative bacilli;grows from a stalkSimilar to CaulobacterMethylocystis Gram-negative, coccoidor short bacilliNitrogen-fixing aerobic bacteriaRhizobium Gram-negative,rectangular bacilli withrounded ends formingclustersNitrogen-fixing bacteria that live in soil and form symbioticrelationship with roots of legumes (e.g., clover, alfalfa, andbeans)Rickettsia Gram-negative, highlypleomorphic bacteria(may be cocci, rods, orthreads)Obligate intracellular bacteria; transmitted by ticks; may causeRocky Mountain spotted fever and typhusTable 4.2• What characteristic do all Alphaproteobacteria share?BetaproteobacteriaUnlike Alphaproteobacteria, which survive on a minimal amount of nutrients, the class Betaproteobacteria areeutrophs (or copiotrophs), meaning that they require a copious amount of organic nutrients. Betaproteobacteriaoften grow between aerobic and anaerobic areas (e.g., in mammalian intestines). Some genera include species thatare human pathogens, able to cause severe, sometimes life-threatening disease. The genus Neisseria, for example,includes the bacteria N. gonorrhoeae, the causative agent of the STI gonorrhea, and N. meningitides, the causativeagent of bacterial meningitis.Neisseria are cocci that live on mucosal surfaces of the human body. They are fastidious, or difficult to culture, andthey require high levels of moisture, nutrient supplements, and carbon dioxide. Also, Neisseria are microaerophilic,meaning that they require low levels of oxygen. For optimal growth and for the purposes of identification, Neisseriaspp. are grown on chocolate agar (i.e., agar supplemented by partially hemolyzed red blood cells). Their characteristicpattern of growth in culture is diplococcal: pairs of cells resembling coffee beans (Figure 4.6).160 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.6 Neisseria meningitidis growing in colonies on a chocolate agar plate. (credit: Centers for Disease Controland Prevention)The pathogen responsible for pertussis (whooping cough) is also a member of Betaproteobacteria. The bacteriumBordetella pertussis, from the order Burkholderiales, produces several toxins that paralyze the movement of cilia inthe human respiratory tract and directly damage cells of the respiratory tract, causing a severe cough.Table 4.3 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Betaproteobacteria.Class BetaproteobacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsBordetella A small, gram-negativecoccobacillusAerobic, very fastidious; B. pertussis causes pertussis (whoopingcough)Burkholderia Gram-negative bacillus Aerobic, aquatic, cause diseases in horses and humans (especiallypatients with cystic fibrosis); agents of nosocomial infectionsLeptothrix Gram-negative,sheathed, filamentousbacillusAquatic; oxidize iron and manganese; can live in wastewatertreatment plants and clog pipesNeisseria Gram-negative, coffeebean-shaped coccusforming pairsRequire moisture and high concentration of carbon dioxide; oxidasepositive, grow on chocolate agar; pathogenic species causegonorrhea and meningitisThiobacillus Gram-negative bacillus Thermophilic, acidophilic, strictly aerobic bacteria; oxidize iron andsulfurTable 4.3• What characteristic do all Betaproteobacteria share?Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 161Part 2When Marsha finally went to the doctor’s office, the physician listened to her breathing through a stethoscope.He heard some crepitation (a crackling sound) in her lungs, so he ordered a chest radiograph and asked thenurse to collect a sputum sample for microbiological evaluation and cytology. The radiologic evaluation foundcavities, opacities, and a particular pattern of distribution of abnormal material (Figure 4.7).• What are some possible diseases that could be responsible for Marsha’s radiograph results?Figure 4.7 This anteroposterior radiograph shows the presence of bilateral pulmonary infiltrate (whitetriangles) and “caving formation” (black arrows) present in the right apical region. (credit: Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.GammaproteobacteriaThe most diverse class of gram-negative bacteria is Gammaproteobacteria, and it includes a number of humanpathogens. For example, a large and diverse family, Pseudomonaceae, includes the genus Pseudomonas. Within thisgenus is the species P. aeruginosa, a pathogen responsible for diverse infections in various regions of the body. P.aeruginosa is a strictly aerobic, nonfermenting, highly motile bacterium. It often infects wounds and burns, can bethe cause of chronic urinary tract infections, and can be an important cause of respiratory infections in patients withcystic fibrosis or patients on mechanical ventilators. Infections by P. aeruginosa are often difficult to treat becausethe bacterium is resistant to many antibiotics and has a remarkable ability to form biofilms. Other representativesof Pseudomonas include the fluorescent (glowing) bacterium P. fluorescens and the soil bacteria P. putida, which isknown for its ability to degrade xenobiotics (substances not naturally produced or found in living organisms).The Pasteurellaceae also includes several clinically relevant genera and species. This family includes several bacteriathat are human and/or animal pathogens. For example, Pasteurella haemolytica causes severe pneumonia in sheepand goats. P. multocida is a species that can be transmitted from animals to humans through bites, causing infectionsof the skin and deeper tissues. The genus Haemophilus contains two human pathogens, H. influenzae and H. ducreyi.Despite its name, H. influenzae does not cause influenza (which is a viral disease). H. influenzae can cause bothupper and lower respiratory tract infections, including sinusitis, bronchitis, ear infections, and pneumonia. Before thedevelopment of effective vaccination, strains of H. influenzae were a leading cause of more invasive diseases, likemeningitis in children. H. ducreyi causes the STI known as chancroid.The order Vibrionales includes the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae. This comma-shaped aquatic bacterium thrivesClinical Focus162 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5in highly alkaline environments like shallow lagoons and sea ports. A toxin produced by V. cholerae causeshypersecretion of electrolytes and water in the large intestine, leading to profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration.V. parahaemolyticus is also a cause of gastrointestinal disease in humans, whereas V. vulnificus causes serious andpotentially life-threatening cellulitis (infection of the skin and deeper tissues) and blood-borne infections. Anotherrepresentative of Vibrionales, Aliivibrio fischeri, engages in a symbiotic relationship with squid. The squid providesnutrients for the bacteria to grow and the bacteria produce bioluminescence that protects the squid from predators(Figure 4.8).Figure 4.8 (a) Aliivibrio fischeri is a bioluminescent bacterium. (b) A. fischeri colonizes and lives in a mutualisticrelationship with the Hawaiian bobtail squid (Euprymna scolopes). (credit a: modification of work by American Societyfor Microbiology; credit b: modification of work by Margaret McFall-Ngai)The genus Legionella also belongs to the Gammaproteobacteria. L. pneumophila, the pathogen responsible forLegionnaires disease, is an aquatic bacterium that tends to inhabit pools of warm water, such as those found inthe tanks of air conditioning units in large buildings (Figure 4.9). Because the bacteria can spread in aerosols,outbreaks of Legionnaires disease often affect residents of a building in which the water has become contaminatedwith Legionella. In fact, these bacteria derive their name from the first known outbreak of Legionnaires disease, whichoccurred in a hotel hosting an American Legion veterans’ association convention in Philadelphia in 1976.Figure 4.9 (a) Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires disease, thrives in warm water. (b)Outbreaks of Legionnaires disease often originate in the air conditioning units of large buildings when water in or nearthe system becomes contaminated with L. pneumophila. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of enteric (intestinal) bacteria belonging to the Gammaproteobacteria. Theyare facultative anaerobes and are able to ferment carbohydrates. Within this family, microbiologists recognize twodistinct categories. The first category is called the coliforms, after its prototypical bacterium species, Escherichia coli.Coliforms are able to ferment lactose completely (i.e., with the production of acid and gas). The second category,Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 163noncoliforms, either cannot ferment lactose or can only ferment it incompletely (producing either acid or gas, but notboth). The noncoliforms include some notable human pathogens, such as Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., and Yersiniapestis.E. coli has been perhaps the most studied bacterium since it was first described in 1886 by Theodor Escherich(1857–1911). Many strains of E. coli are in mutualistic relationships with humans. However, some strains producea potentially deadly toxin called Shiga toxin. Shiga toxin is one of the most potent bacterial toxins identified. Uponentering target cells, Shiga toxin interacts with ribosomes, stopping protein synthesis. Lack of protein synthesis leadsto cellular death and hemorrhagic colitis, characterized by inflammation of intestinal tract and bloody diarrhea. Inthe most severe cases, patients can develop a deadly hemolytic uremic syndrome. Other E. coli strains may causetraveler’s diarrhea, a less severe but very widespread disease.The genus Salmonella, which belongs to the noncoliform group of Enterobacteriaceae, is interesting in that thereis still no consensus about how many species it includes. Scientists have reclassified many of the groups they oncethought to be species as serotypes (also called serovars), which are strains or variations of the same species ofbacteria. Their classification is based on patterns of reactivity by animal antisera against molecules on the surfaceof the bacterial cells. A number of serotypes of Salmonella can cause salmonellosis, characterized by inflammationof the small and the large intestine, accompanied by fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The species S. enterobacterica(serovar typhi) causes typhoid fever, with symptoms including fever, abdominal pain, and skin rashes (Figure 4.10).Figure 4.10 Salmonella typhi is the causative agent of typhoid fever. (credit: Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Table 4.4 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Gammaproteobacteria.Class GammaproteobacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsBeggiatoa Gram-negativebacteria; disc-shapedor cylindricalAquatic, live in water with high content of hydrogen disulfide; cancause problems for sewage treatmentEnterobacter Gram-negativebacillusFacultative anaerobe; cause urinary and respiratory tract infectionsin hospitalized patients; implicated in the pathogenesis of obesityErwinia Gram-negativebacillusPlant pathogen causing leaf spots and discoloration; may digestcellulose; prefer relatively low temperatures (25–30 °C)Table 4.4164 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Class GammaproteobacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsEscherichia Gram-negativebacillusFacultative anaerobe; inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of warmbloodedanimals; some strains are mutualists, producing vitamin K;others, like serotype E. coli O157:H7, are pathogens; E. coli hasbeen a model organism for many studies in genetics and molecularbiologyHemophilus Gram-negativebacillusPleomorphic, may appear as coccobacillus, aerobe, or facultativeanaerobe; grow on blood agar; pathogenic species can causerespiratory infections, chancroid, and other diseasesKlebsiella Gram-negativebacillus; appearsrounder and thickerthan other membersof EnterobacteriaceaeFacultative anaerobe, encapsulated, nonmotile; pathogenic speciesmay cause pneumonia, especially in people with alcoholismLegionella Gram-negativebacillusFastidious, grow on charcoal-buffered yeast extract; L. pneumophilacauses Legionnaires diseaseMethylomonas Gram-negativebacillusUse methane as source of carbon and energyProteus Gram-negativebacillus (pleomorphic)Common inhabitants of the human gastrointestinal tract; motile;produce urease; opportunistic pathogens; may cause urinary tractinfections and sepsisPseudomonas Gram-negativebacillusAerobic; versatile; produce yellow and blue pigments, making themappear green in culture; opportunistic, antibiotic-resistant pathogensmay cause wound infections, hospital-acquired infections, andsecondary infections in patients with cystic fibrosisSerratia Gram-negativebacillusMotile; may produce red pigment; opportunistic pathogensresponsible for a large number of hospital-acquired infectionsShigella Gram-negativebacillusNonmotile; dangerously pathogenic; produce Shiga toxin, which candestroy cells of the gastrointestinal tract; can cause dysenteryVibrio Gram-negative,comma- or curvedrod-shaped bacteriaInhabit seawater; flagellated, motile; may produce toxin that causeshypersecretion of water and electrolytes in the gastrointestinal tract;some species may cause serious wound infectionsYersinia Gram-negativebacillusCarried by rodents; human pathogens; Y. pestis causes bubonicplague and pneumonic plague; Y. enterocolitica can be a pathogencausing diarrhea in humansTable 4.4• List two families of Gammaproteobacteria.DeltaproteobacteriaThe Deltaproteobacteria is a small class of gram-negative Proteobacteria that includes sulfate-reducing bacteriaChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 165(SRBs), so named because they use sulfate as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain. Few SRBsare pathogenic. However, the SRB Desulfovibrio orale is associated with periodontal disease (disease of the gums).Deltaproteobacteria also includes the genus Bdellovibrio, species of which are parasites of other gram-negativebacteria. Bdellovibrio invades the cells of the host bacterium, positioning itself in the periplasm, the space betweenthe plasma membrane and the cell wall, feeding on the host’s proteins and polysaccharides. The infection is lethal forthe host cells.Another type of Deltaproteobacteria, myxobacteria, lives in the soil, scavenging inorganic compounds. Motile andhighly social, they interact with other bacteria within and outside their own group. They can form multicellular,macroscopic “fruiting bodies” (Figure 4.11), structures that are still being studied by biologists and bacterialecologists.[11] These bacteria can also form metabolically inactive myxospores.Figure 4.11 Myxobacteria form fruiting bodies. (credit: modification of work by Michiel Vos)Table 4.5 summarizes the characteristics of several important genera of Deltaproteobacteria.Class DeltaproteobacteriaGenus Microscopic Morphology Unique characteristicsBdellovibrio Gram-negative, commashapedrodObligate aerobes; motile; parasitic (infecting otherbacteria)Desulfovibrio(formerlyDesufuromonas)Gram-negative, commashapedrodReduce sulfur; can be used for removal of toxic andradioactive wasteMyxobacterium Gram-negative, coccoidbacteria forming colonies(swarms)Live in soil; can move by gliding; used as a modelorganism for studies of intercellular communication(signaling)Table 4.511. H. Reichenbach. “Myxobacteria, Producers of Novel Bioactive Substances.” Journal of Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology 27 no.3 (2001):149–156.166 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What type of Deltaproteobacteria forms fruiting bodies?EpsilonproteobacteriaThe smallest class of Proteobacteria is Epsilonproteobacteria, which are gram-negative microaerophilic bacteria(meaning they only require small amounts of oxygen in their environment). Two clinically relevant genera ofEpsilonproteobacteria are Campylobacter and Helicobacter, both of which include human pathogens. Campylobactercan cause food poisoning that manifests as severe enteritis (inflammation in the small intestine). This condition,caused by the species C. jejuni, is rather common in developed countries, usually because of eating contaminatedpoultry products. Chickens often harbor C. jejuni in their gastrointestinal tract and feces, and their meat can becomecontaminated during processing.Within the genus Helicobacter, the helical, flagellated bacterium H. pylori has been identified as a beneficial memberof the stomach microbiota, but it is also the most common cause of chronic gastritis and ulcers of the stomachand duodenum (Figure 4.12). Studies have also shown that H. pylori is linked to stomach cancer.[12] H. pylori issomewhat unusual in its ability to survive in the highly acidic environment of the stomach. It produces urease andother enzymes that modify its environment to make it less acidic.Figure 4.12 Helicobacter pylori can cause chronic gastritis, which can lead to ulcers and stomach cancer.Table 4.6 summarizes the characteristics of the most clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria.Class EpsilonproteobacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsCampylobacter Gram-negative,spiral-shapedrodAerobic (microaerophilic); often infects chickens; may infect humans viaundercooked meat, causing severe enteritisHelicobacter Gram-negative,spiral-shapedrodAerobic (microaerophilic) bacterium; can damage the inner lining of thestomach, causing chronic gastritis, peptic ulcers, and stomach cancerTable 4.612. S. Suerbaum, P. Michetti. “Helicobacter pylori infection.” New England Journal of Medicine 347 no. 15 (2002):1175–1186.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 167• Name two Epsilonproteobacteria that cause gastrointestinal disorders.4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria andPhototrophic BacteriaLearning Objectives• Describe the unique features of nonproteobacteria gram-negative bacteria• Give an example of a nonproteobacteria bacterium in each category• Describe the unique features of phototrophic bacteria• Identify phototrophic bacteriaThe majority of the gram-negative bacteria belong to the phylum Proteobacteria, discussed in the previous section.Those that do not are called the nonproteobacteria. In this section, we will describe three classes of gram-negativenonproteobacteria: the spirochetes, the CFB group, and the Planctomycetes. A diverse group of phototrophic bacteriathat includes Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria will be discussed at the end of this section.SpirochetesSpirochetes are characterized by their long (up to 250 μm), spiral-shaped bodies. Most spirochetes are also very thin,which makes it difficult to examine gram-stained preparations under a conventional brightfield microscope. Darkfieldfluorescent microscopy is typically used instead. Spirochetes are also difficult or even impossible to culture. They arehighly motile, using their axial filament to propel themselves. The axial filament is similar to a flagellum, but it wrapsaround the cell and runs inside the cell body of a spirochete in the periplasmic space between the outer membrane andthe plasma membrane (Figure 4.13).168 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.13 Spirochetes are typically observed using darkfield microscopy (left). However, electron microscopy (topcenter, bottom center) provides a more detailed view of their cellular morphology. The flagella found between theinner and outer membranes of spirochetes wrap around the bacterium, causing a twisting motion used for locomotion.(credit “spirochetes” micrograph: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “SEM/TEM”: modification of work by Guyard C, Raffel SJ, Schrumpf ME, Dahlstrom E, Sturdevant D, Ricklefs SM, MartensC, Hayes SF, Fischer ER, Hansen BT, Porcella SF, Schwan TG)Several genera of spirochetes include human pathogens. For example, the genus Treponema includes a species T.pallidum, which is further classified into four subspecies: T. pallidum pallidum, T. pallidum pertenue, T. pallidumcarateum, and T. pallidum endemicum. The subspecies T. pallidum pallidum causes the sexually transmitted infectionknown as syphilis, the third most prevalent sexually transmitted bacterial infection in the United States, afterchlamydia and gonorrhea. The other subspecies of T. pallidum cause tropical infectious diseases of the skin, bones,and joints.Another genus of spirochete, Borrelia, contains a number of pathogenic species. B. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease,which is transmitted by several genera of ticks (notably Ixodes and Amblyomma) and often produces a “bull’s eye”rash, fever, fatigue, and, sometimes, debilitating arthritis. B. recurrens causes a condition known as relapsing fever.Appendix D lists the genera, species, and related diseases for spirochetes.• Why do scientists typically use darkfield fluorescent microscopy to visualize spirochetes?Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 169Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and BacteroidesThe gram-negative nonproteobacteria of the genera Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides are classifiedtogether as a phylum and called the CFB group. Although they are phylogenetically diverse, bacteria of the CFBgroup share some similarities in the sequence of nucleotides in their DNA. They are rod-shaped bacteria adaptedto anaerobic environments, such as the tissue of the gums, gut, and rumen of ruminating animals. CFB bacteria areavid fermenters, able to process cellulose in rumen, thus enabling ruminant animals to obtain carbon and energy fromgrazing.Cytophaga are motile aquatic bacteria that glide. Fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severeinfectious diseases. The largest genus of the CFB group is Bacteroides, which includes dozens of species that areprevalent inhabitants of the human large intestine, making up about 30% of the entire gut microbiome (Figure 4.14).One gram of human feces contains up to 100 billion Bacteroides cells. Most Bacteroides are mutualistic. They benefitfrom nutrients they find in the gut, and humans benefit from their ability to prevent pathogens from colonizing thelarge intestine. Indeed, when populations of Bacteroides are reduced in the gut—as often occurs when a patienttakes antibiotics—the gut becomes a more favorable environment for pathogenic bacteria and fungi, which can causesecondary infections.Figure 4.14 Bacteroides comprise up to 30% of the normal microbiota in the human gut. (credit: NOAA)Only a few species of Bacteroides are pathogenic. B. melaninogenicus, for example, can cause wound infections inpatients with weakened immune systems.• Why are Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides classified together as the CFB group?PlanctomycetesThe Planctomycetes are found in aquatic environments, inhabiting freshwater, saltwater, and brackish water.Planctomycetes are unusual in that they reproduce by budding, meaning that instead of one maternal cell splitting intotwo equal daughter cells in the process of binary fission, the mother cell forms a bud that detaches from the mothercell and lives as an independent cell. These so-called swarmer cells are motile and not attached to a surface. However,they will soon differentiate into sessile (immobile) cells with an appendage called a holdfast that allows them to attachto surfaces in the water (Figure 4.15). Only the sessile cells are able to reproduce.170 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.15 (a) Sessile Planctomycetes have a holdfast that allows them to adhere to surfaces in aquaticenvironments. (b) Swarmers are motile and lack a holdfast. (credit: modification of work by American Society forMicrobiology)Table 4.7 summarizes the characteristics of some of the most clinically relevant genera of nonproteobacteria.NonproteobacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopic Morphology Unique CharacteristicsBacteroides Gram-negative bacillus Obligate anaerobic bacteria; abundant in the humangastrointestinal tract; usually mutualistic, althoughsome species are opportunistic pathogensCytophaga Gram-negative bacillus Motile by gliding; live in soil or water; decomposecellulose; may cause disease in fishFusobacterium Gram-negative bacillus withpointed endsAnaerobic; form; biofilms; some species cause diseasein humans (periodontitis, ulcers)Leptospira Spiral-shaped bacterium(spirochetes); gram negative-like(better viewed by darkfieldmicroscopy); very thinAerobic, abundant in shallow water reservoirs; infectrodents and domestic animals; can be transmitted tohumans by infected animals’ urine; may cause severediseaseBorrelia Gram-negative-like spirochete;very thin; better viewed bydarkfield microscopyB. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease and B. recurrenscauses relapsing feverTreponema Gram-negative-like spirochete;very thin; better viewed bydarkfield microscopyMotile; do not grow in culture; T. pallidum (subspeciesT. pallidum pallidum) causes syphilisTable 4.7• How do Planctomycetes reproduce?Phototrophic BacteriaThe phototrophic bacteria are a large and diverse category of bacteria that do not represent a taxon but, rather, agroup of bacteria that use sunlight as their primary source of energy. This group contains both Proteobacteria andChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 171nonproteobacteria. They use solar energy to synthesize ATP through photosynthesis. When they produce oxygen, theyperform oxygenic photosynthesis. When they do not produce oxygen, they perform anoxygenic photosynthesis. Withthe exception of some cyanobacteria, the majority of phototrophic bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis.One large group of phototrophic bacteria includes the purple or green bacteria that perform photosynthesis with thehelp of bacteriochlorophylls, which are green, purple, or blue pigments similar to chlorophyll in plants. Some ofthese bacteria have a varying amount of red or orange pigments called carotenoids. Their color varies from orange tored to purple to green (Figure 4.16), and they are able to absorb light of various wavelengths. Traditionally, thesebacteria are classified into sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria; they are further differentiated by color.Figure 4.16 Purple and green sulfur bacteria use bacteriochlorophylls to perform photosynthesis.The sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, using sulfites as electron donors and releasing free elementalsulfur. Nonsulfur bacteria use organic substrates, such as succinate and malate, as donors of electrons.The purple sulfur bacteria oxidize hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur and sulfuric acid and get their purplecolor from the pigments bacteriochlorophylls and carotenoids. Bacteria of the genus Chromatium are purple sulfurGammaproteobacteria. These microorganisms are strict anaerobes and live in water. They use carbon dioxide as theironly source of carbon, but their survival and growth are possible only in the presence of sulfites, which they use aselectron donors. Chromatium has been used as a model for studies of bacterial photosynthesis since the 1950s.[13]The green sulfur bacteria use sulfide for oxidation and produce large amounts of green bacteriochlorophyll. Thegenus Chlorobium is a green sulfur bacterium that is implicated in climate change because it produces methane, agreenhouse gas. These bacteria use at least four types of chlorophyll for photosynthesis. The most prevalent of these,bacteriochlorophyll, is stored in special vesicle-like organelles called chlorosomes.Purple nonsulfur bacteria are similar to purple sulfur bacteria, except that they use hydrogen rather than hydrogensulfide for oxidation. Among the purple nonsulfur bacteria is the genus Rhodospirillum. These microorganisms arefacultative anaerobes, which are actually pink rather than purple, and can metabolize (“fix”) nitrogen. They may bevaluable in the field of biotechnology because of their potential ability to produce biological plastic and hydrogenfuel.[14]The green nonsulfur bacteria are similar to green sulfur bacteria but they use substrates other than sulfides foroxidation. Chloroflexus is an example of a green nonsulfur bacterium. It often has an orange color when it growsin the dark, but it becomes green when it grows in sunlight. It stores bacteriochlorophyll in chlorosomes, similarto Chlorobium, and performs anoxygenic photosynthesis, using organic sulfites (low concentrations) or molecularhydrogen as electron donors, so it can survive in the dark if oxygen is available. Chloroflexus does not have flagella13. R.C. Fuller et al. “Carbon Metabolism in Chromatium.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 236 (1961):2140–2149.14. T.T. Selao et al. “Comparative Proteomic Studies in Rhodospirillum rubrum Grown Under Different Nitrogen Conditions.” Journal ofProteome Research 7 no. 8 (2008):3267–3275.172 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5but can glide, like Cytophaga. It grows at a wide range of temperatures, from 35 °C to 70 °C, thus can be thermophilic.Another large, diverse group of phototrophic bacteria compose the phylum Cyanobacteria; they get their bluegreencolor from the chlorophyll contained in their cells (Figure 4.17). Species of this group perform oxygenicphotosynthesis, producing megatons of gaseous oxygen. Scientists hypothesize that cyanobacteria played a criticalrole in the change of our planet’s anoxic atmosphere 1–2 billion years ago to the oxygen-rich environment we havetoday.[15]Figure 4.17 (a) Microcystis aeruginosa is a type of cyanobacteria commonly found in freshwater environments. (b)In warm temperatures, M. aeruginosa and other cyanobacteria can multiply rapidly and produce neurotoxins,resulting in blooms that are harmful to fish and other aquatic animals. (credit a: modification of work by Dr. Barry H.Rosen/U.S. Geological Survey; credit b: modification of work by NOAA)Cyanobacteria have other remarkable properties. Amazingly adaptable, they thrive in many habitats, including marineand freshwater environments, soil, and even rocks. They can live at a wide range of temperatures, even in the extremetemperatures of the Antarctic. They can live as unicellular organisms or in colonies, and they can be filamentous,forming sheaths or biofilms. Many of them fix nitrogen, converting molecular nitrogen into nitrites and nitratesthat other bacteria, plants, and animals can use. The reactions of nitrogen fixation occur in specialized cells calledheterocysts.Photosynthesis in Cyanobacteria is oxygenic, using the same type of chlorophyll a found in plants and algaeas the primary photosynthetic pigment. Cyanobacteria also use phycocyanin and cyanophycin, two secondaryphotosynthetic pigments that give them their characteristic blue color. They are located in special organelles calledphycobilisomes and in folds of the cellular membrane called thylakoids, which are remarkably similar to thephotosynthetic apparatus of plants. Scientists hypothesize that plants originated from endosymbiosis of ancestraleukaryotic cells and ancestral photosynthetic bacteria.[16] Cyanobacteria are also an interesting object of research inbiochemistry,[17] with studies investigating their potential as biosorbents[18] and products of human nutrition.[19]Unfortunately, cyanobacteria can sometimes have a negative impact on human health. Genera such as Microcystiscan form harmful cyanobacterial blooms, forming dense mats on bodies of water and producing large quantities oftoxins that can harm wildlife and humans. These toxins have been implicated in tumors of the liver and diseases ofthe nervous system in animals and humans.[20]15. A. De los Rios et al. “Ultrastructural and Genetic Characteristics of Endolithic Cyanobacterial Biofilms Colonizing Antarctic GraniteRocks.” FEMS Microbiology Ecology 59 no. 2 (2007):386–395.16. T. Cavalier-Smith. “Membrane Heredity and Early Chloroplast Evolution.” Trends in Plant Science 5 no. 4 (2000):174–182.17. S. Zhang, D.A. Bryant. “The Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle in Cyanobacteria.” Science 334 no. 6062 (2011):1551–1553.18. A. Cain et al. “Cyanobacteria as a Biosorbent for Mercuric Ion.” Bioresource Technology 99 no. 14 (2008):6578–6586.19. C.S. Ku et al. “Edible Blue-Green Algae Reduce the Production of Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines by Inhibiting NF-κB Pathway inMacrophages and Splenocytes.” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1830 no. 4 (2013):2981–2988.20. I. Stewart et al. Cyanobacterial Poisoning in Livestock, Wild Mammals and Birds – an Overview. Advances in Experimental MedicineChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 173Table 4.8 summarizes the characteristics of important phototrophic bacteria.Phototrophic BacteriaPhylum Class ExampleGenus orSpeciesCommonNameOxygenic orAnoxygenicSulfurDepositionCyanobacteria Cyanophyceae MicrocystisaeruginosaBlue-greenbacteriaOxygenic NoneChlorobi Chlorobia Chlorobium Green sulfurbacteriaAnoxygenic Outside thecellChloroflexi(Division)Chloroflexi Chloroflexus GreennonsulfurbacteriaAnoxygenic NoneAlphaproteobacteria Rhodospirillum PurplenonsulfurbacteriaAnoxygenic NoneBetaproteobacteria Rhodocyclus PurplenonsulfurbacteriaProteobacteria Anoxygenic NoneGammaproteobacteria Chromatium Purple sulfurbacteriaAnoxygenic Inside thecellTable 4.8• What characteristic makes phototrophic bacteria different from other prokaryotes?4.4 Gram-Positive BacteriaLearning Objectives• Describe the unique features of each category of high G+C and low G+C gram-positive bacteria• Identify similarities and differences between high G+C and low G+C bacterial groups• Give an example of a bacterium of high G+C and low G+C group commonly associated with each categoryProkaryotes are identified as gram-positive if they have a multiple layer matrix of peptidoglycan forming the cellwall. Crystal violet, the primary stain of the Gram stain procedure, is readily retained and stabilized within thismatrix, causing gram-positive prokaryotes to appear purple under a brightfield microscope after Gram staining. Formany years, the retention of Gram stain was one of the main criteria used to classify prokaryotes, even though someprokaryotes did not readily stain with either the primary or secondary stains used in the Gram stain procedure.Advances in nucleic acid biochemistry have revealed additional characteristics that can be used to classify grampositiveprokaryotes, namely the guanine to cytosine ratios (G+C) in DNA and the composition of 16S rRNAsubunits. Microbiologists currently recognize two distinct groups of gram-positive, or weakly staining gram-positive,prokaryotes. The class Actinobacteria comprises the high G+C gram-positive bacteria, which have more than 50%and Biology 619 (2008):613–637.174 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA. The class Bacilli comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria, whichhave less than 50% of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA.Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-Positive BacteriaThe name Actinobacteria comes from the Greek words for rays and small rod, but Actinobacteria are very diverse.Their microscopic appearance can range from thin filamentous branching rods to coccobacilli. Some Actinobacteriaare very large and complex, whereas others are among the smallest independently living organisms. MostActinobacteria live in the soil, but some are aquatic. The vast majority are aerobic. One distinctive feature of thisgroup is the presence of several different peptidoglycans in the cell wall.The genus Actinomyces is a much studied representative of Actinobacteria. Actinomyces spp. play an important rolein soil ecology, and some species are human pathogens. A number of Actinomyces spp. inhabit the human mouthand are opportunistic pathogens, causing infectious diseases like periodontitis (inflammation of the gums) and oralabscesses. The species A. israelii is an anaerobe notorious for causing endocarditis (inflammation of the inner liningof the heart) (Figure 4.18).Figure 4.18 (a) Actinomyces israelii (false-color scanning electron micrograph [SEM]) has a branched structure. (b)Corynebacterium diphtheria causes the deadly disease diphtheria. Note the distinctive palisades. (c) The gramvariablebacterium Gardnerella vaginalis causes bacterial vaginosis in women. This micrograph shows a Pap smearfrom a woman with vaginosis. (credit a: modification of work by “GrahamColm”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Mwakigonja AR,Torres LM, Mwakyoma HA, Kaaya EE)The genus Mycobacterium is represented by bacilli covered with a mycolic acid coat. This waxy coat protects thebacteria from some antibiotics, prevents them from drying out, and blocks penetration by Gram stain reagents (seeStaining Microscopic Specimens). Because of this, a special acid-fast staining procedure is used to visualizethese bacteria. The genus Mycobacterium is an important cause of a diverse group of infectious diseases. M.tuberculosis is the causative agent of tuberculosis, a disease that primarily impacts the lungs but can infect otherparts of the body as well. It has been estimated that one-third of the world’s population has been infected with M.tuberculosis and millions of new infections occur each year. Treatment of M. tuberculosis is challenging and requirespatients to take a combination of drugs for an extended time. Complicating treatment even further is the developmentand spread of multidrug-resistant strains of this pathogen.Another pathogenic species, M. leprae, is the cause of Hansen’s disease (leprosy), a chronic disease that impactsperipheral nerves and the integrity of the skin and mucosal surface of the respiratory tract. Loss of pain sensation andthe presence of skin lesions increase susceptibility to secondary injuries and infections with other pathogens.Bacteria in the genus Corynebacterium contain diaminopimelic acid in their cell walls, and microscopically oftenform palisades, or pairs of rod-shaped cells resembling the letter V. Cells may contain metachromatic granules,intracellular storage of inorganic phosphates that are useful for identification of Corynebacterium. The vast majorityof Corynebacterium spp. are nonpathogenic; however, C. diphtheria is the causative agent of diphtheria, a disease thatcan be fatal, especially in children (Figure 4.18). C. diphtheria produces a toxin that forms a pseudomembrane inChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 175the patient’s throat, causing swelling, difficulty breathing, and other symptoms that can become serious if untreated.The genus Bifidobacterium consists of filamentous anaerobes, many of which are commonly found in thegastrointestinal tract, vagina, and mouth. In fact, Bifidobacterium spp. constitute a substantial part of the human gutmicrobiota and are frequently used as probiotics and in yogurt production.The genus Gardnerella, contains only one species, G. vaginalis. This species is defined as “gram-variable” becauseits small coccobacilli do not show consistent results when Gram stained (Figure 4.18). Based on its genome, it isplaced into the high G+C gram-positive group. G. vaginalis can cause bacterial vaginosis in women; symptoms aretypically mild or even undetectable, but can lead to complications during pregnancy.Table 4.9 summarizes the characteristics of some important genera of Actinobacteria. Additional information onActinobacteria appears in Appendix D.Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-PositiveExample Genus MicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsActinomyces Gram-positivebacillus; in colonies,shows fungus-likethreads (hyphae)Facultative anaerobes; in soil, decompose organic matter; in thehuman mouth, may cause gum diseaseArthrobacter Gram-positivebacillus (at theexponential stage ofgrowth) or coccus (instationary phase)Obligate aerobes; divide by “snapping,” forming V-like pairs ofdaughter cells; degrade phenol, can be used in bioremediationBifidobacterium Gram-positive,filamentousactinobacteriumAnaerobes commonly found in human gut microbiotaCorynebacterium Gram-positivebacillusAerobes or facultative anaerobes; form palisades; grow slowly;require enriched media in culture; C. diphtheriae causesdiphtheriaFrankia Gram-positive,fungus-like(filamentous) bacillusNitrogen-fixing bacteria; live in symbiosis with legumesGardnerella Gram-variablecoccobacillusColonize the human vagina, may alter the microbial ecology, thusleading to vaginosisMicrococcus Gram-positivecoccus, formmicroscopic clustersUbiquitous in the environment and on the human skin; oxidasepositive(as opposed to morphologically similar S. aureus); someare opportunistic pathogensMycobacterium Gram-positive, acidfastbacillusSlow growing, aerobic, resistant to drying and phagocytosis;covered with a waxy coat made of mycolic acid; M. tuberculosiscauses tuberculosis; M. leprae causes leprosyNocardia Weakly gram-positivebacillus; forms acidfastbranchesMay colonize the human gingiva; may cause severe pneumoniaand inflammation of the skinPropionibacterium Gram-positivebacillusAerotolerant anaerobe; slow-growing; P. acnes reproduces in thehuman sebaceous glands and may cause or contribute to acneTable 4.9176 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-PositiveExample Genus MicroscopicMorphologyUnique CharacteristicsRhodococcus Gram-positivebacillusStrict aerobe; used in industry for biodegradation of pollutants; R.fascians is a plant pathogen, and R. equi causes pneumonia infoalsStreptomyces Gram-positive,fungus-like(filamentous) bacillusVery diverse genus (>500 species); aerobic, spore-formingbacteria; scavengers, decomposers found in soil (give the soil its“earthy” odor); used in pharmaceutical industry as antibioticproducers (more than two-thirds of clinically useful antibiotics)Table 4.9• What is one distinctive feature of Actinobacteria?Low G+C Gram-positive BacteriaThe low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50% guanine and cytosine in their DNA, and this group ofbacteria includes a number of genera of bacteria that are pathogenic.Part 3Based on her symptoms, Marsha’s doctor suspected that she had a case of tuberculosis. Although lesscommon in the United States, tuberculosis is still extremely common in many parts of the world, includingNigeria. Marsha’s work there in a medical lab likely exposed her to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacteriumthat causes tuberculosis.Marsha’s doctor ordered her to stay at home, wear a respiratory mask, and confine herself to one room asmuch as possible. He also said that Marsha had to take one semester off school. He prescribed isoniazid andrifampin, antibiotics used in a drug cocktail to treat tuberculosis, which Marsha was to take three times a dayfor at least three months.• Why did the doctor order Marsha to stay home for three months?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.ClostridiaOne large and diverse class of low G+C gram-positive bacteria is Clostridia. The best studied genus of this class isClostridium. These rod-shaped bacteria are generally obligate anaerobes that produce endospores and can be foundin anaerobic habitats like soil and aquatic sediments rich in organic nutrients. The endospores may survive for manyyears.Clostridium spp. produce more kinds of protein toxins than any other bacterial genus, and several species are humanpathogens. C. perfringens is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the United States and is the causativeagent of an even more serious disease called gas gangrene. Gas gangrene occurs when C. perfringens endosporesClinical FocusChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 177enter a wound and germinate, becoming viable bacterial cells and producing a toxin that can cause the necrosis (death)of tissue. C. tetani, which causes tetanus, produces a neurotoxin that is able to enter neurons, travel to regions of thecentral nervous system where it blocks the inhibition of nerve impulses involved in muscle contractions, and causea life-threatening spastic paralysis. C. botulinum produces botulinum neurotoxin, the most lethal biological toxinknown. Botulinum toxin is responsible for rare but frequently fatal cases of botulism. The toxin blocks the release ofacetylcholine in neuromuscular junctions, causing flaccid paralysis. In very small concentrations, botulinum toxin hasbeen used to treat muscle pathologies in humans and in a cosmetic procedure to eliminate wrinkles. C. difficile is acommon source of hospital-acquired infections (Figure 4.19) that can result in serious and even fatal cases of colitis(inflammation of the large intestine). Infections often occur in patients who are immunosuppressed or undergoingantibiotic therapy that alters the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract. Appendix D lists the genera, species,and related diseases for Clostridia.Figure 4.19 Clostridium difficile, a gram-positive, rod-shaped bacterium, causes severe colitis and diarrhea, oftenafter the normal gut microbiota is eradicated by antibiotics. (credit: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)LactobacillalesThe order Lactobacillales comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include both bacilli and cocci in thegenera Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus. Bacteria of the latter three genera typically arespherical or ovoid and often form chains.Streptococcus, the name of which comes from the Greek word for twisted chain, is responsible for many types ofinfectious diseases in humans. Species from this genus, often referred to as streptococci, are usually classified byserotypes called Lancefield groups, and by their ability to lyse red blood cells when grown on blood agar.S. pyogenes belongs to the Lancefield group A, β-hemolytic Streptococcus. This species is considered a pyogenicpathogen because of the associated pus production observed with infections it causes (Figure 4.20). S. pyogenes isthe most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis (strep throat); it is also an important cause of various skin infectionsthat can be relatively mild (e.g., impetigo) or life threatening (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis, also known as flesh eatingdisease), life threatening.178 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.20 (a) A gram-stained specimen of Streptococcus pyogenes shows the chains of cocci characteristic of thisorganism’s morphology. (b) S. pyogenes on blood agar shows characteristic lysis of red blood cells, indicated by thehalo of clearing around colonies. (credit a, b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)The nonpyogenic (i.e., not associated with pus production) streptococci are a group of streptococcal species that arenot a taxon but are grouped together because they inhabit the human mouth. The nonpyogenic streptococci do notbelong to any of the Lancefield groups. Most are commensals, but a few, such as S. mutans, are implicated in thedevelopment of dental caries.S. pneumoniae (commonly referred to as pneumococcus), is a Streptococcus species that also does not belong toany Lancefield group. S. pneumoniae cells appear microscopically as diplococci, pairs of cells, rather than thelong chains typical of most streptococci. Scientists have known since the 19th century that S. pneumoniae causespneumonia and other respiratory infections. However, this bacterium can also cause a wide range of other diseases,including meningitis, septicemia, osteomyelitis, and endocarditis, especially in newborns, the elderly, and patientswith immunodeficiency.BacilliThe name of the class Bacilli suggests that it is made up of bacteria that are bacillus in shape, but it is amorphologically diverse class that includes bacillus-shaped and cocccus-shaped genera. Among the many genera inthis class are two that are very important clinically: Bacillus and Staphylococcus.Bacteria in the genus Bacillus are bacillus in shape and can produce endospores. They include aerobes or facultativeanaerobes. A number of Bacillus spp. are used in various industries, including the production of antibiotics (e.g.,barnase), enzymes (e.g., alpha-amylase, BamH1 restriction endonuclease), and detergents (e.g., subtilisin).Two notable pathogens belong to the genus Bacillus. B. anthracis is the pathogen that causes anthrax, a severe diseasethat affects wild and domesticated animals and can spread from infected animals to humans. Anthrax manifests inhumans as charcoal-black ulcers on the skin, severe enterocolitis, pneumonia, and brain damage due to swelling. Ifuntreated, anthrax is lethal. B. cereus, a closely related species, is a pathogen that may cause food poisoning. It is arod-shaped species that forms chains. Colonies appear milky white with irregular shapes when cultured on blood agar(Figure 4.21). One other important species is B. thuringiensis. This bacterium produces a number of substances usedas insecticides because they are toxic for insects.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 179Figure 4.21 (a) In this gram-stained specimen, the violet rod-shaped cells forming chains are the gram-positivebacteria Bacillus cereus. The small, pink cells are the gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli. (b) In this culture,white colonies of B. cereus have been grown on sheep blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by “Bibliomaniac15”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)The genus Staphylococcus also belongs to the class Bacilli, even though its shape is coccus rather than a bacillus. Thename Staphylococcus comes from a Greek word for bunches of grapes, which describes their microscopic appearancein culture (Figure 4.22). Staphylococcus spp. are facultative anaerobic, halophilic, and nonmotile. The two beststudiedspecies of this genus are S. epidermidis and S. aureus.Figure 4.22 This SEM of Staphylococcus aureus illustrates the typical “grape-like” clustering of cells. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)S. epidermidis, whose main habitat is the human skin, is thought to be nonpathogenic for humans with healthyimmune systems, but in patients with immunodeficiency, it may cause infections in skin wounds and prostheses (e.g.,artificial joints, heart valves). S. epidermidis is also an important cause of infections associated with intravenouscatheters. This makes it a dangerous pathogen in hospital settings, where many patients may be immunocompromised.Strains of S. aureus cause a wide variety of infections in humans, including skin infections that produce boils,carbuncles, cellulitis, or impetigo. Certain strains of S. aureus produce a substance called enterotoxin, which cancause severe enteritis, often called staph food poisoning. Some strains of S. aureus produce the toxin responsible fortoxic shock syndrome, which can result in cardiovascular collapse and death.Many strains of S. aureus have developed resistance to antibiotics. Some antibiotic-resistant strains are designatedas methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA). These strains are some of180 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the most difficult to treat because they exhibit resistance to nearly all available antibiotics, not just methicillin andvancomycin. Because they are difficult to treat with antibiotics, infections can be lethal. MRSA and VRSA are alsocontagious, posing a serious threat in hospitals, nursing homes, dialysis facilities, and other places where there arelarge populations of elderly, bedridden, and/or immunocompromised patients. Appendix D lists the genera, species,and related diseases for bacilli.MycoplasmasAlthough Mycoplasma spp. do not possess a cell wall and, therefore, are not stained by Gram-stain reagents, thisgenus is still included with the low G+C gram-positive bacteria. The genus Mycoplasma includes more than 100species, which share several unique characteristics. They are very small cells, some with a diameter of about 0.2 μm,which is smaller than some large viruses. They have no cell walls and, therefore, are pleomorphic, meaning that theymay take on a variety of shapes and can even resemble very small animal cells. Because they lack a characteristicshape, they can be difficult to identify. One species, M. pneumoniae, causes the mild form of pneumonia known as“walking pneumonia” or “atypical pneumonia.” This form of pneumonia is typically less severe than forms caused byother bacteria or viruses.Table 4.10 summarizes the characteristics of notable genera low G+C Gram-positive bacteria.Bacilli: Low G+C Gram-Positive BacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopic Morphology Unique CharacteristicsBacillus Large, gram-positive bacillus Aerobes or facultative anaerobes; form endospores; B.anthracis causes anthrax in cattle and humans, B. cereusmay cause food poisoningClostridium Gram-positive bacillus Strict anaerobes; form endospores; all known species arepathogenic, causing tetanus, gas gangrene, botulism, andcolitisEnterococcus Gram-positive coccus; formsmicroscopic pairs in culture(resembling Streptococcuspneumoniae)Anaerobic aerotolerant bacteria, abundant in the humangut, may cause urinary tract and other infections in thenosocomial environmentLactobacillus Gram-positive bacillus Facultative anaerobes; ferment sugars into lactic acid; partof the vaginal microbiota; used as probioticsLeuconostoc Gram-positive coccus; mayform microscopic chains incultureFermenter, used in food industry to produce sauerkraut andkefirMycoplasma The smallest bacteria;appear pleomorphic underelectron microscopeHave no cell wall; classified as low G+C Gram-positivebacteria because of their genome; M. pneumoniae causes“walking” pneumoniaStaphylococcus Gram-positive coccus; formsmicroscopic clusters inculture that resemblebunches of grapesTolerate high salt concentration; facultative anaerobes;produce catalase; S. aureus can also produce coagulaseand toxins responsible for local (skin) and generalizedinfectionsStreptococcus Gram-positive coccus; formschains or pairs in cultureDiverse genus; classified into groups based on sharingcertain antigens; some species cause hemolysis and mayproduce toxins responsible for human local (throat) andgeneralized diseaseTable 4.10Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 181Bacilli: Low G+C Gram-Positive BacteriaExampleGenusMicroscopic Morphology Unique CharacteristicsUreaplasma Similar to Mycoplasma Part of the human vaginal and lower urinary tractmicrobiota; may cause inflammation, sometimes leading tointernal scarring and infertilityTable 4.10• Name some ways in which streptococci are classified.• Name one pathogenic low G+C gram-positive bacterium and a disease it causes.ResolutionMarsha’s sputum sample was sent to the microbiology lab to confirm the identity of the microorganism causingher infection. The lab also performed antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) on the sample to confirm thatthe physician has prescribed the correct antimicrobial drugs.Direct microscopic examination of the sputum revealed acid-fast bacteria (AFB) present in Marsha’s sputum.When placed in culture, there were no signs of growth for the first 8 days, suggesting that microorganism waseither dead or growing very slowly. Slow growth is a distinctive characteristic of M. tuberculosis.After four weeks, the lab microbiologist observed distinctive colorless granulated colonies (Figure 4.23). Thecolonies contained AFB showing the same microscopic characteristics as those revealed during the directmicroscopic examination of Marsha’s sputum. To confirm the identification of the AFB, samples of the colonieswere analyzed using nucleic acid hybridization, or direct nucleic acid amplification (NAA) testing. When abacterium is acid-fast, it is classified in the family Mycobacteriaceae. DNA sequencing of variable genomicregions of the DNA extracted from these bacteria revealed that it was high G+C. This fact served to finalizeMarsha’s diagnosis as infection with M. tuberculosis. After nine months of treatment with the drugs prescribedby her doctor, Marsha made a full recovery.Clinical Focus182 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.23 M. tuberculosis grows on Löwenstein-Jensen (LJ) agar in distinct colonies. (credit: Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Biopiracy and BioprospectingIn 1969, an employee of a Swiss pharmaceutical company was vacationing in Norway and decided to collectsome soil samples. He took them back to his lab, and the Swiss company subsequently used the fungusTolypocladium inflatum in those samples to develop cyclosporine A, a drug widely used in patients whoundergo tissue or organ transplantation. The Swiss company earns more than $1 billion a year for productionof cyclosporine A, yet Norway receives nothing in return—no payment to the government or benefit for theNorwegian people. Despite the fact the cyclosporine A saves numerous lives, many consider the means bywhich the soil samples were obtained to be an act of “biopiracy,” essentially a form of theft. Do the ends justifythe means in a case like this?Nature is full of as-yet-undiscovered bacteria and other microorganisms that could one day be used to developnew life-saving drugs or treatments.[21] Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies stand to reap hugeprofits from such discoveries, but ethical questions remain. To whom do biological resources belong? Shouldcompanies who invest (and risk) millions of dollars in research and development be required to share revenueor royalties for the right to access biological resources?Compensation is not the only issue when it comes to bioprospecting. Some communities and cultures arephilosophically opposed to bioprospecting, fearing unforeseen consequences of collecting genetic or biologicalmaterial. Native Hawaiians, for example, are very protective of their unique biological resources.For many years, it was unclear what rights government agencies, private corporations, and citizens had whenit came to collecting samples of microorganisms from public land. Then, in 1993, the Convention on BiologicalDiversity granted each nation the rights to any genetic and biological material found on their own land.Scientists can no longer collect samples without a prior arrangement with the land owner for compensation.This convention now ensures that companies act ethically in obtaining the samples they use to create theirEye on EthicsChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 183products.4.5 Deeply Branching BacteriaLearning Objectives• Describe the unique features of deeply branching bacteria• Give examples of significant deeply branching bacteriaOn a phylogenetic tree (see A Systematic Approach), the trunk or root of the tree represents a common ancientevolutionary ancestor, often called the last universal common ancestor (LUCA), and the branches are its evolutionarydescendants. Scientists consider the deeply branching bacteria, such as the genus Acetothermus, to be the first ofthese non-LUCA forms of life produced by evolution some 3.5 billion years ago. When placed on the phylogenetictree, they stem from the common root of life, deep and close to the LUCA root—hence the name “deeply branching”(Figure 4.24).Figure 4.24 The star on this phylogenetic tree of life shows the position of the deeply branching bacteriaAcetothermus. (credit: modification of work by Eric Gaba)The deeply branching bacteria may provide clues regarding the structure and function of ancient and now extinctforms of life. We can hypothesize that ancient bacteria, like the deeply branching bacteria that still exist, werethermophiles or hyperthermophiles, meaning that they thrived at very high temperatures. Acetothermus paucivorans,a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium discovered in 1988 in sewage sludge, is a thermophile growing at an optimaltemperature of 58 °C.[22] Scientists have determined it to be the deepest branching bacterium, or the closestevolutionary relative of the LUCA (Figure 4.24).The class Aquificae includes deeply branching bacteria that are adapted to the harshest conditions on our planet,resembling the conditions thought to dominate the earth when life first appeared. Bacteria from the genus Aquifex21. J. Andre. Bioethics as Practice. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.22. G. Dietrich et al. “Acetothermus paucivorans, gen. nov., sp. Nov., a Strictly Anaerobic, Thermophilic Bacterium From Sewage Sludge,Fermenting Hexoses to Acetate, CO2, and H2.” Systematic and Applied Microbiology 10 no. 2 (1988):174–179.184 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5are hyperthermophiles, living in hot springs at a temperature higher than 90 °C. The species A. pyrophilus thrivesnear underwater volcanoes and thermal ocean vents, where the temperature of water (under high pressure) can reach138 °C. Aquifex bacteria use inorganic substances as nutrients. For example, A. pyrophilus can reduce oxygen, andit is able to reduce nitrogen in anaerobic conditions. They also show a remarkable resistance to ultraviolet light andionizing radiation. Taken together, these observations support the hypothesis that the ancient ancestors of deeplybranching bacteria began evolving more than 3 billion years ago, when the earth was hot and lacked an atmosphere,exposing the bacteria to nonionizing and ionizing radiation.The class Thermotogae is represented mostly by hyperthermophilic, as well as some mesophilic (preferring moderatetemperatures), anaerobic gram-negative bacteria whose cells are wrapped in a peculiar sheath-like outer membranecalled a toga. The thin layer of peptidoglycan in their cell wall has an unusual structure; it contains diaminopimelicacid and D-lysine. These bacteria are able to use a variety of organic substrates and produce molecular hydrogen,which can be used in industry. The class contains several genera, of which the best known is the genus Thermotoga.One species of this genus, T. maritima, lives near the thermal ocean vents and thrives in temperatures of 90 °C;another species, T. subterranea, lives in underground oil reservoirs.Finally, the deeply branching bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans belongs to a genus whose name is derivedfrom a Greek word meaning terrible berry. Nicknamed “Conan the Bacterium,” D. radiodurans is considered apolyextremophile because of its ability to survive under the many different kinds of extreme conditions—extremeheat, drought, vacuum, acidity, and radiation. It owes its name to its ability to withstand doses of ionizing radiationthat kill all other known bacteria; this special ability is attributed to some unique mechanisms of DNA repair.Figure 4.25 Deinococcus radiodurans, or “Conan the Bacterium,” survives in the harshest conditions on earth.4.6 ArchaeaLearning Objectives• Describe the unique features of each category of Archaea• Explain why archaea might not be associated with human microbiomes or pathology• Give common examples of archaea commonly associated with unique environmental habitatsLike organisms in the domain Bacteria, organisms of the domain Archaea are all unicellular organisms. However,archaea differ structurally from bacteria in several significant ways, as discussed in Unique Characteristics ofChapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 185Prokaryotic Cells. To summarize:• The archaeal cell membrane is composed of ether linkages with branched isoprene chains (as opposed to thebacterial cell membrane, which has ester linkages with unbranched fatty acids).• Archaeal cell walls lack peptidoglycan, but some contain a structurally similar substance calledpseudopeptidoglycan or pseudomurein.• The genomes of Archaea are larger and more complex than those of bacteria.Domain Archaea is as diverse as domain Bacteria, and its representatives can be found in any habitat. Some archaeaare mesophiles, and many are extremophiles, preferring extreme hot or cold, extreme salinity, or other conditions thatare hostile to most other forms of life on earth. Their metabolism is adapted to the harsh environments, and they canperform methanogenesis, for example, which bacteria and eukaryotes cannot.The size and complexity of the archaeal genome makes it difficult to classify. Most taxonomists agree that withinthe Archaea, there are currently five major phyla: Crenarchaeota, Euryarchaeota, Korarchaeota, Nanoarchaeota, andThaumarchaeota. There are likely many other archaeal groups that have not yet been systematically studied andclassified.With few exceptions, archaea are not present in the human microbiota, and none are currently known to be associatedwith infectious diseases in humans, animals, plants, or microorganisms. However, many play important roles in theenvironment and may thus have an indirect impact on human health.CrenarchaeotaCrenarchaeota is a class of Archaea that is extremely diverse, containing genera and species that differ vastly in theirmorphology and requirements for growth. All Crenarchaeota are aquatic organisms, and they are thought to be themost abundant microorganisms in the oceans. Most, but not all, Crenarchaeota are hyperthermophiles; some of them(notably, the genus Pyrolobus) are able to grow at temperatures up to 113 °C.[23]Archaea of the genus Sulfolobus (Figure 4.26) are thermophiles that prefer temperatures around 70–80°C andacidophiles that prefer a pH of 2–3.[24] Sulfolobus can live in aerobic or anaerobic environments. In the presence ofoxygen, Sulfolobus spp. use metabolic processes similar to those of heterotrophs. In anaerobic environments, theyoxidize sulfur to produce sulfuric acid, which is stored in granules. Sulfolobus spp. are used in biotechnology forthe production of thermostable and acid-resistant proteins called affitins.[25] Affitins can bind and neutralize variousantigens (molecules found in toxins or infectious agents that provoke an immune response from the body).23. E. Blochl et al.“Pyrolobus fumani, gen. and sp. nov., represents a novel group of Archaea, extending the upper temperature limit for lifeto 113°C.” Extremophiles 1 (1997):14–21.24. T.D. Brock et al. “Sulfolobus: A New Genus of Sulfur-Oxidizing Bacteria Living at Low pH and High Temperature.” Archiv fürMikrobiologie 84 no. 1 (1972):54–68.25. S. Pacheco et al. “Affinity Transfer to the Archaeal Extremophilic Sac7d Protein by Insertion of a CDR.” Protein Engineering Designand Selection 27 no. 10 (2014):431-438.186 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 4.26 Sulfolobus, an archaeon of the class Crenarchaeota, oxidizes sulfur and stores sulfuric acid in itsgranules.Another genus, Thermoproteus, is represented by strictly anaerobic organisms with an optimal growth temperatureof 85 °C. They have flagella and, therefore, are motile. Thermoproteus has a cellular membrane in which lipids forma monolayer rather than a bilayer, which is typical for archaea. Its metabolism is autotrophic. To synthesize ATP,Thermoproteus spp. reduce sulfur or molecular hydrogen and use carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide as a source ofcarbon. Thermoproteus is thought to be the deepest-branching genus of Archaea, and thus is a living example of someof our planet’s earliest forms of life.• What types of environments do Crenarchaeota prefer?EuryarchaeotaThe phylum Euryarchaeota includes several distinct classes. Species in the classes Methanobacteria, Methanococci,and Methanomicrobia represent Archaea that can be generally described as methanogens. Methanogens are uniquein that they can reduce carbon dioxide in the presence of hydrogen, producing methane. They can live in the mostextreme environments and can reproduce at temperatures varying from below freezing to boiling. Methanogens havebeen found in hot springs as well as deep under ice in Greenland. Some scientists have even hypothesized thatmethanogens may inhabit the planet Mars because the mixture of gases produced by methanogens resembles themakeup of the Martian atmosphere.[26]Methanogens are thought to contribute to the formation of anoxic sediments by producing hydrogen sulfide, making“marsh gas.” They also produce gases in ruminants and humans. Some genera of methanogens, notablyMethanosarcina, can grow and produce methane in the presence of oxygen, although the vast majority are strictanaerobes.The class Halobacteria (which was named before scientists recognized the distinction between Archaea and Bacteria)includes halophilic (“salt-loving”) archaea. Halobacteria require a very high concentrations of sodium chloride intheir aquatic environment. The required concentration is close to saturation, at 36%; such environments include theDead Sea as well as some salty lakes in Antarctica and south-central Asia. One remarkable feature of these organisms26. R.R. Britt “Crater Critters: Where Mars Microbes Might Lurk.” http://www.space.com/1880-crater-critters-mars-microbes-lurk.html.Accessed April 7, 2015.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 187is that they perform photosynthesis using the protein bacteriorhodopsin, which gives them, and the bodies of waterthey inhabit, a beautiful purple color (Figure 4.27).Figure 4.27 Halobacteria growing in these salt ponds gives them a distinct purple color. (credit: modification of workby Tony Hisgett)Notable species of Halobacteria include Halobacterium salinarum, which may be the oldest living organism on earth;scientists have isolated its DNA from fossils that are 250 million years old.[27] Another species, Haloferax volcanii,shows a very sophisticated system of ion exchange, which enables it to balance the concentration of salts at hightemperatures.• Where do Halobacteria live?Finding a Link Between Archaea and DiseaseArchaea are not known to cause any disease in humans, animals, plants, bacteria, or in other archaea.Although this makes sense for the extremophiles, not all archaea live in extreme environments. Many generaand species of Archaea are mesophiles, so they can live in human and animal microbiomes, although theyrarely do. As we have learned, some methanogens exist in the human gastrointestinal tract. Yet we have noreliable evidence pointing to any archaean as the causative agent of any human disease.Still, scientists have attempted to find links between human disease and archaea. For example, in 2004, Leppet al. presented evidence that an archaean called Methanobrevibacter oralis inhabits the gums of patients withperiodontal disease. The authors suggested that the activity of these methanogens causes the disease.[28]However, it was subsequently shown that there was no causal relationship between M. oralis and periodontitis.It seems more likely that periodontal disease causes an enlargement of anaerobic regions in the mouth thatare subsequently populated by M. oralis.[29]Micro Connections27. H. Vreeland et al. “Fatty acid and DA Analyses of Permian Bacterium Isolated From Ancient Salt Crystals Reveal Differences WithTheir Modern Relatives.” Extremophiles 10 (2006):71–78.28. P.W. Lepp et al. “Methanogenic Archaea and Human Gum Disease.” Proceedings of the National Academies of Science of the United188 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5There remains no good answer as to why archaea do not seem to be pathogenic, but scientists continue tospeculate and hope to find the answer.Summary4.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes• Prokaryotes are unicellular microorganisms whose cells have no nucleus.• Prokaryotes can be found everywhere on our planet, even in the most extreme environments.• Prokaryotes are very flexible metabolically, so they are able to adjust their feeding to the available naturalresources.• Prokaryotes live in communities that interact among themselves and with large organisms that they use ashosts (including humans).• The totality of forms of prokaryotes (particularly bacteria) living on the human body is called the humanmicrobiome, which varies between regions of the body and individuals, and changes over time.• The totality of forms of prokaryotes (particularly bacteria) living in a certain region of the human body (e.g.,mouth, throat, gut, eye, vagina) is called the microbiota of this region.• Prokaryotes are classified into domains Archaea and Bacteria.• In recent years, the traditional approaches to classification of prokaryotes have been supplemented byapproaches based on molecular genetics.4.2 Proteobacteria• Proteobacteria is a phylum of gram-negative bacteria discovered by Carl Woese in the 1980s based onnucleotide sequence homology.• Proteobacteria are further classified into the classes alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta- and epsilonproteobacteria,each class having separate orders, families, genera, and species.• Alphaproteobacteria are oligotrophs. The taxa chlamydias and rickettsias are obligate intracellularpathogens, feeding on cells of host organisms; they are metabolically inactive outside of the host cell. SomeAlphaproteobacteria can convert atmospheric nitrogen to nitrites, making nitrogen usable by other forms oflife.• Betaproteobacteria are eutrophs. They include human pathogens of the genus Neisseria and the speciesBordetella pertussis.• Gammaproteobacteria are the largest and the most diverse group of Proteobacteria. Many are humanpathogens that are aerobes or facultative anaerobes. Some Gammaproteobacteria are enteric bacteria that maybe coliform or noncoliform. Escherichia coli, a member of Gammaproteobacteria, is perhaps the most studiedbacterium.• Deltaproteobacteria make up a small group able to reduce sulfate or elemental sulfur. Some are scavengersand form myxospores, with multicellular fruiting bodies.• Epsilonproteobacteria make up the smallest group of Proteobacteria. The genera Campylobacter andHelicobacter are human pathogens.4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria• Gram-negative nonproteobacteria include the taxa spirochetes; the Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, Bacteroidesgroup; Planctomycetes; and many representatives of phototrophic bacteria.• Spirochetes are motile, spiral bacteria with a long, narrow body; they are difficult or impossible to culture.States of America 101 no. 16 (2004):6176–6181.29. R.I. Aminov. “Role of Archaea in Human Disease.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 3 (2013):42.Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic Diversity 189• Several genera of spirochetes contain human pathogens that cause such diseases as syphilis and Lyme disease.• Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides are classified together as a phylum called the CFB group. Theyare rod-shaped anaerobic organoheterotrophs and avid fermenters. Cytophaga are aquatic bacteria with thegliding motility. Fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious diseases. Bacteroidesare present in vast numbers in the human gut, most of them being mutualistic but some are pathogenic.• Planctomycetes are aquatic bacteria that reproduce by budding; they may form large colonies, and develop aholdfast.• Phototrophic bacteria are not a taxon but, rather, a group categorized by their ability to use the energy ofsunlight. They include Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria, as well as sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria coloredpurple or green.• Sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, using sulfur compounds as donors of electrons, whereasnonsulfur bacteria use organic compounds (succinate, malate) as donors of electrons.• Some phototrophic bacteria are able to fix nitrogen, providing the usable forms of nitrogen to other organisms.• Cyanobacteria are oxygen-producing bacteria thought to have played a critical role in the forming of theearth’s atmosphere.4.4 Gram-Positive Bacteria• Gram-positive bacteria are a very large and diverse group of microorganisms. Understanding their taxonomyand knowing their unique features is important for diagnostics and treatment of infectious diseases.• Gram-positive bacteria are classified into high G+C gram-positive and low G+C gram-positive bacteria,based on the prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their genome• Actinobacteria is the taxonomic name of the class of high G+C gram-positive bacteria. This class includes thegenera Actinomyces, Arthrobacter, Corynebacterium, Frankia, Gardnerella, Micrococcus, Mycobacterium,Nocardia, Propionibacterium, Rhodococcus, and Streptomyces. Some representatives of these genera are usedin industry; others are human or animal pathogens.• Examples of high G+C gram-positive bacteria that are human pathogens include Mycobacterium tuberculosis,which causes tuberculosis; M. leprae, which causes leprosy (Hansen’s disease); and Corynebacteriumdiphtheriae, which causes diphtheria.• Clostridia spp. are low G+C gram-positive bacteria that are generally obligate anaerobes and can formendospores. Pathogens in this genus include C. perfringens (gas gangrene), C. tetani (tetanus), and C.botulinum (botulism).• Lactobacillales include the genera Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Streptococcus.Streptococcus is responsible for many human diseases, including pharyngitis (strep throat), scarlet fever,rheumatic fever, glomerulonephritis, pneumonia, and other respiratory infections.• Bacilli is a taxonomic class of low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include rod-shaped and coccus-shapedspecies, including the genera Bacillus and Staphylococcus. B. anthracis causes anthrax, B. cereus may causeopportunistic infections of the gastrointestinal tract, and S. aureus strains can cause a wide range of infectionsand diseases, many of which are highly resistant to antibiotics.• Mycoplasma spp. are very small, pleomorphic low G+C gram-positive bacteria that lack cell walls. M.pneumoniae causes atypical pneumonia.4.5 Deeply Branching Bacteria• Deeply branching bacteria are phylogenetically the most ancient forms of life, being the closest to the lastuniversal common ancestor.• Deeply branching bacteria include many species that thrive in extreme environments that are thought toresemble conditions on earth billions of years ago• Deeply branching bacteria are important for our understanding of evolution; some of them are used in industry4.6 Archaea• Archaea are unicellular, prokaryotic microorganisms that differ from bacteria in their genetics, biochemistry,190 Chapter 4 | Prokaryotic DiversityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5and ecology.• Some archaea are extremophiles, living in environments with extremely high or low temperatures, or extremesalinity.• Only archaea are known to produce methane. Methane-producing archaea are called methanogens.• Halophilic archaea prefer a concentration of salt close to saturation and perform photosynthesis usingbacteriorhodopsin.• Some archaea, based on fossil evidence, are among the oldest organisms on earth.• Archaea do not live in great numbers in human microbiomes and are not known to cause disease.