Chapter 16Disease and EpidemiologyFigure 16.1 Signs like this may seem self-explanatory today, but a few short centuries ago, people lacked a basicunderstanding of how diseases spread. Microbiology has greatly contributed to the field of epidemiology, whichfocuses on containing the spread of disease. (credit: modification of work by Tony Webster)Chapter Outline16.1 The Language of Epidemiologists16.2 Tracking Infectious Diseases16.3 Modes of Disease Transmission16.4 Global Public HealthIntroductionIn the United States and other developed nations, public health is a key function of government. A healthy citizenryis more productive, content, and prosperous; high rates of death and disease, on the other hand, can severely hampereconomic productivity and foster social and political instability. The burden of disease makes it difficult for citizens towork consistently, maintain employment, and accumulate wealth to better their lives and support a growing economy.In this chapter, we will explore the intersections between microbiology and epidemiology, the science that underliespublic health. Epidemiology studies how disease originates and spreads throughout a population, with the goalof preventing outbreaks and containing them when they do occur. Over the past two centuries, discoveries inepidemiology have led to public health policies that have transformed life in developed nations, leading to theeradication (or near eradication) of many diseases that were once causes of great human suffering and prematuredeath. However, the work of epidemiologists is far from finished. Numerous diseases continue to plague humanity,and new diseases are always emerging. Moreover, in the developing world, lack of infrastructure continues to posemany challenges to efforts to contain disease.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 70316.1 The Language of EpidemiologistsLearning Objectives• Explain the difference between prevalence and incidence of disease• Distinguish the characteristics of sporadic, endemic, epidemic, and pandemic diseases• Explain the use of Koch’s postulates and their modifications to determine the etiology of disease• Explain the relationship between epidemiology and public healthThe field of epidemiology concerns the geographical distribution and timing of infectious disease occurrencesand how they are transmitted and maintained in nature, with the goal of recognizing and controlling outbreaks.The science of epidemiology includes etiology (the study of the causes of disease) and investigation of diseasetransmission (mechanisms by which a disease is spread).Analyzing Disease in a PopulationEpidemiological analyses are always carried out with reference to a population, which is the group of individuals thatare at risk for the disease or condition. The population can be defined geographically, but if only a portion of theindividuals in that area are susceptible, additional criteria may be required. Susceptible individuals may be defined byparticular behaviors, such as intravenous drug use, owning particular pets, or membership in an institution, such as acollege. Being able to define the population is important because most measures of interest in epidemiology are madewith reference to the size of the population.The state of being diseased is called morbidity. Morbidity in a population can be expressed in a few different ways.Morbidity or total morbidity is expressed in numbers of individuals without reference to the size of the population.The morbidity rate can be expressed as the number of diseased individuals out of a standard number of individualsin the population, such as 100,000, or as a percent of the population.There are two aspects of morbidity that are relevant to an epidemiologist: a disease’s prevalence and its incidence.Prevalence is the number, or proportion, of individuals with a particular illness in a given population at a point intime. For example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that in 2012, there were about1.2 million people 13 years and older with an active human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Expressed as aproportion, or rate, this is a prevalence of 467 infected persons per 100,000 in the population.[1] On the other hand,Part 1In late November and early December, a hospital in western Florida started to see a spike in the numberof cases of acute gastroenteritis-like symptoms. Patients began arriving at the emergency departmentcomplaining of excessive bouts of emesis (vomiting) and diarrhea (with no blood in the stool). They alsocomplained of abdominal pain and cramping, and most were severely dehydrated. Alarmed by the numberof cases, hospital staff made some calls and learned that other regional hospitals were also seeing 10 to 20similar cases per day.• What are some possible causes of this outbreak?• In what ways could these cases be linked, and how could any suspected links be confirmed?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1. H. Irene Hall, Qian An, Tian Tang, Ruiguang Song, Mi Chen, Timothy Green, and Jian Kang. “Prevalence of Diagnosed and704 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5incidence is the number or proportion of new cases in a period of time. For the same year and population, the CDCestimates that there were 43,165 newly diagnosed cases of HIV infection, which is an incidence of 13.7 new casesper 100,000 in the population.[2] The relationship between incidence and prevalence can be seen in Figure 16.2.For a chronic disease like HIV infection, prevalence will generally be higher than incidence because it represents thecumulative number of new cases over many years minus the number of cases that are no longer active (e.g., becausethe patient died or was cured).In addition to morbidity rates, the incidence and prevalence of mortality (death) may also be reported. A mortalityrate can be expressed as the percentage of the population that has died from a disease or as the number of deaths per100,000 persons (or other suitable standard number).Figure 16.2 This graph compares the incidence of HIV (the number of new cases reported each year) with theprevalence (the total number of cases each year). Prevalence and incidence can also be expressed as a rate orproportion for a given population.• Explain the difference between incidence and prevalence.• Describe how morbidity and mortality rates are expressed.Patterns of IncidenceDiseases that are seen only occasionally, and usually without geographic concentration, are called sporadic diseases.Examples of sporadic diseases include tetanus, rabies, and plague. In the United States, Clostridium tetani, thebacterium that causes tetanus, is ubiquitous in the soil environment, but incidences of infection occur only rarely andin scattered locations because most individuals are vaccinated, clean wounds appropriately, or are only rarely in asituation that would cause infection.[3] Likewise in the United States there are a few scattered cases of plague eachyear, usually contracted from rodents in rural areas in the western states.[4]Undiagnosed HIV Infection—United States, 2008–2012.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 64, no. 24 (2015): 657–662.2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Diagnoses of HIV Infection in the United States and Dependent Areas, 2014.” HIVSurveillance Report 26 (2015).3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tetanus Surveillance—United States, 2001–2008.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report60, no. 12 (2011): 365.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 705Diseases that are constantly present (often at a low level) in a population within a particular geographic region arecalled endemic diseases. For example, malaria is endemic to some regions of Brazil, but is not endemic to the UnitedStates.Diseases for which a larger than expected number of cases occurs in a short time within a geographic region are calledepidemic diseases. Influenza is a good example of a commonly epidemic disease. Incidence patterns of influenzatend to rise each winter in the northern hemisphere. These seasonal increases are expected, so it would not be accurateto say that influenza is epidemic every winter; however, some winters have an usually large number of seasonalinfluenza cases in particular regions, and such situations would qualify as epidemics (Figure 16.3 and Figure 16.4).An epidemic disease signals the breakdown of an equilibrium in disease frequency, often resulting from some changein environmental conditions or in the population. In the case of influenza, the disruption can be due to antigenic shiftor drift (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens), which allows influenza virus strains tocircumvent the acquired immunity of their human hosts.An epidemic that occurs on a worldwide scale is called a pandemic disease. For example, HIV/AIDS is a pandemicdisease and novel influenza virus strains often become pandemic.Figure 16.3 The 2007–2008 influenza season in the United States saw much higher than normal numbers of visitsto emergency departments for influenza-like symptoms as compared to the previous and the following years. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Plague in the United States.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/plague/maps. Accessed June 1,2016.706 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 16.4 The seasonal epidemic threshold (blue curve) is set by the CDC-based data from the previous fiveyears. When actual mortality rates exceed this threshold, a disease is considered to be epidemic. As this graphshows, pneumonia- and influenza-related mortality saw pronounced epidemics during the winters of 2003–2004,2005, and 2008. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Explain the difference between sporadic and endemic disease.• Explain the difference between endemic and epidemic disease.Part 2Hospital physicians suspected that some type of food poisoning was to blame for the sudden post-Thanksgiving outbreak of gastroenteritis in western Florida. Over a two-week period, 254 cases wereobserved, but by the end of the first week of December, the epidemic ceased just as quickly as it had started.Suspecting a link between the cases based on the localized nature of the outbreak, hospitals handed over theirmedical records to the regional public health office for study.Laboratory testing of stool samples had indicated that the infections were caused by Salmonella bacteria.Patients ranged from children as young as three to seniors in their late eighties. Cases were nearly evenlysplit between males and females. Across the region, there had been three confirmed deaths in the outbreak,all due to severe dehydration. In each of the fatal cases, the patients had not sought medical care until theirsymptoms were severe; also, all of the deceased had preexisting medical conditions such as congestive heartfailure, diabetes, or high blood pressure.Clinical FocusChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 707After reviewing the medical records, epidemiologists with the public health office decided to conduct interviewswith a randomly selected sample of patients.• What conclusions, if any, can be drawn from the medical records?• What would epidemiologists hope to learn by interviewing patients? What kinds of questions might theyask?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.EtiologyWhen studying an epidemic, an epidemiologist’s first task is to determinate the cause of the disease, called theetiologic agent or causative agent. Connecting a disease to a specific pathogen can be challenging because of theextra effort typically required to demonstrate direct causation as opposed to a simple association. It is not enough toobserve an association between a disease and a suspected pathogen; controlled experiments are needed to eliminateother possible causes. In addition, pathogens are typically difficult to detect when there is no immediate clue as towhat is causing the outbreak. Signs and symptoms of disease are also commonly nonspecific, meaning that manydifferent agents can give rise to the same set of signs and symptoms. This complicates diagnosis even when acausative agent is familiar to scientists.Robert Koch was the first scientist to specifically demonstrate the causative agent of a disease (anthrax) in the late1800s. Koch developed four criteria, now known as Koch’s postulates, which had to be met in order to positivelylink a disease with a pathogenic microbe. Without Koch’s postulates, the Golden Age of Microbiology would nothave occurred. Between 1876 and 1905, many common diseases were linked with their etiologic agents, includingcholera, diphtheria, gonorrhea, meningitis, plague, syphilis, tetanus, and tuberculosis. Today, we use the molecularKoch’s postulates, a variation of Koch’s original postulates that can be used to establish a link between the diseasestate and virulence traits unique to a pathogenic strain of a microbe. Koch’s original postulates and molecular Koch’spostulates were described in more detail in How Pathogens Cause Disease.• List some challenges to determining the causative agent of a disease outbreak.The Role of Public Health OrganizationsThe main national public health agency in the United States is the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC), an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services. The CDC is charged with protecting the publicfrom disease and injury. One way that the CDC carries out this mission is by overseeing the National NotifiableDisease Surveillance System (NNDSS) in cooperation with regional, state, and territorial public health departments.The NNDSS monitors diseases considered to be of public health importance on a national scale. Such diseases arecalled notifiable diseases or reportable diseases because all cases must be reported to the CDC. A physician treatinga patient with a notifiable disease is legally required to submit a report on the case. Notifiable diseases include HIVinfection, measles,West Nile virus infections, and many others. Some states have their own lists of notifiable diseasesthat include diseases beyond those on the CDC’s list.Notifiable diseases are tracked by epidemiological studies and the data is used to inform health-care providers andthe public about possible risks. The CDC publishes the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), whichprovides physicians and health-care workers with updates on public health issues and the latest data pertaining tonotifiable diseases. Table 16.1 is an example of the kind of data contained in the MMWR.708 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Incidence of Four Notifiable Diseases in the United States, Week Ending January 2, 2016Disease Current Week(Jan 2, 2016)Median ofPrevious 52WeeksMaximum ofPrevious 52 WeeksCumulativeCases 2015Campylobacteriosis 406 869 1,385 46,618Chlamydiatrachomatisinfection11,024 28,562 31,089 1,425,303Giardiasis 115 230 335 11,870Gonorrhea 3,207 7,155 8,283 369,926Table 16.1The current Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (https://openstax.org/l/22mortweekrep) is available online.• Describe how health agencies obtain data about the incidence of diseases of public health importance.16.2 Tracking Infectious DiseasesLearning Objectives• Explain the research approaches used by the pioneers of epidemiology• Explain how descriptive, analytical, and experimental epidemiological studies go about determining the cause ofmorbidity and mortalityEpidemiology has its roots in the work of physicians who looked for patterns in disease occurrence as a way tounderstand how to prevent it. The idea that disease could be transmitted was an important precursor to making senseof some of the patterns. In 1546, Girolamo Fracastoro first proposed the germ theory of disease in his essay DeContagione et Contagiosis Morbis, but this theory remained in competition with other theories, such as the miasmahypothesis, for many years (see What Our Ancestors Knew). Uncertainty about the cause of disease was notan absolute barrier to obtaining useful knowledge from patterns of disease. Some important researchers, such asFlorence Nightingale, subscribed to the miasma hypothesis. The transition to acceptance of the germ theory duringthe 19th century provided a solid mechanistic grounding to the study of disease patterns. The studies of 19th centuryphysicians and researchers such as John Snow, Florence Nightingale, Ignaz Semmelweis, Joseph Lister, Robert Koch,Louis Pasteur, and others sowed the seeds of modern epidemiology.Link to LearningChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 709Pioneers of EpidemiologyJohn Snow (Figure 16.5) was a British physician known as the father of epidemiology for determining the sourceof the 1854 Broad Street cholera epidemic in London. Based on observations he had made during an earlier choleraoutbreak (1848–1849), Snow proposed that cholera was spread through a fecal-oral route of transmission and thata microbe was the infectious agent. He investigated the 1854 cholera epidemic in two ways. First, suspecting thatcontaminated water was the source of the epidemic, Snow identified the source of water for those infected. He founda high frequency of cholera cases among individuals who obtained their water from the River Thames downstreamfrom London. This water contained the refuse and sewage from London and settlements upstream. He also notedthat brewery workers did not contract cholera and on investigation found the owners provided the workers with beerto drink and stated that they likely did not drink water.[5] Second, he also painstakingly mapped the incidence ofcholera and found a high frequency among those individuals using a particular water pump located on Broad Street.In response to Snow’s advice, local officials removed the pump’s handle,[6] resulting in the containment of the BroadStreet cholera epidemic.Snow’s work represents an early epidemiological study and it resulted in the first known public health response to anepidemic. Snow’s meticulous case-tracking methods are now common practice in studying disease outbreaks and inassociating new diseases with their causes. His work further shed light on unsanitary sewage practices and the effectsof waste dumping in the Thames. Additionally, his work supported the germ theory of disease, which argued diseasecould be transmitted through contaminated items, including water contaminated with fecal matter.Snow’s work illustrated what is referred to today as a common source spread of infectious disease, in which there isa single source for all of the individuals infected. In this case, the single source was the contaminated well below theBroad Street pump. Types of common source spread include point source spread, continuous common source spread,and intermittent common source spread. In point source spread of infectious disease, the common source operatesfor a short time period—less than the incubation period of the pathogen. An example of point source spread is asingle contaminated potato salad at a group picnic. In continuous common source spread, the infection occurs for anextended period of time, longer than the incubation period. An example of continuous common source spread wouldbe the source of London water taken downstream of the city, which was continuously contaminated with sewagefrom upstream. Finally, with intermittent common source spread, infections occur for a period, stop, and then beginagain. This might be seen in infections from a well that was contaminated only after large rainfalls and that cleareditself of contamination after a short period.In contrast to common source spread, propagated spread occurs through direct or indirect person-to-person contact.With propagated spread, there is no single source for infection; each infected individual becomes a source for one ormore subsequent infections. With propagated spread, unless the spread is stopped immediately, infections occur forlonger than the incubation period. Although point sources often lead to large-scale but localized outbreaks of shortduration, propagated spread typically results in longer duration outbreaks that can vary from small to large, dependingon the population and the disease (Figure 16.6). In addition, because of person-to-person transmission, propagatedspread cannot be easily stopped at a single source like point source spread.5. John Snow. On the Mode of Communication of Cholera. Second edition, Much Enlarged. John Churchill, 1855.6. John Snow. “The Cholera near Golden-Wquare, and at Deptford.” Medical Times and Gazette 9 (1854): 321–322.http://www.ph.ucla.edu/epi/snow/choleragoldensquare.html.710 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 16.5 (a) John Snow (1813–1858), British physician and father of epidemiology. (b) Snow’s detailed mappingof cholera incidence led to the discovery of the contaminated water pump on Broad street (red square) responsiblefor the 1854 cholera epidemic. (credit a: modification of work by “Rsabbatini”/Wikimedia Commons)Figure 16.6 (a) Outbreaks that can be attributed to point source spread often have a short duration. (b) Outbreaksattributed to propagated spread can have a more extended duration. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)Florence Nightingale’s work is another example of an early epidemiological study. In 1854, Nightingale was partof a contingent of nurses dispatched by the British military to care for wounded soldiers during the Crimean War.Nightingale kept meticulous records regarding the causes of illness and death during the war. Her recordkeeping was afundamental task of what would later become the science of epidemiology. Her analysis of the data she collected waspublished in 1858. In this book, she presented monthly frequency data on causes of death in a wedge chart histogram(Figure 16.7). This graphical presentation of data, unusual at the time, powerfully illustrated that the vast majority ofChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 711casualties during the war occurred not due to wounds sustained in action but to what Nightingale deemed preventableinfectious diseases. Often these diseases occurred because of poor sanitation and lack of access to hospital facilities.Nightingale’s findings led to many reforms in the British military’s system of medical care.Joseph Lister provided early epidemiological evidence leading to good public health practices in clinics and hospitals.These settings were notorious in the mid-1800s for fatal infections of surgical wounds at a time when the germtheory of disease was not yet widely accepted (see Foundations of Modern Cell Theory). Most physicians didnot wash their hands between patient visits or clean and sterilize their surgical tools. Lister, however, discoveredthe disinfecting properties of carbolic acid, also known as phenol (see Using Chemicals to ControlMicroorganisms). He introduced several disinfection protocols that dramatically lowered post-surgical infectionrates.[7] He demanded that surgeons who worked for him use a 5% carbolic acid solution to clean their surgicaltools between patients, and even went so far as to spray the solution onto bandages and over the surgical site duringoperations (Figure 16.8). He also took precautions not to introduce sources of infection from his skin or clothing byremoving his coat, rolling up his sleeves, and washing his hands in a dilute solution of carbolic acid before and duringthe surgery.Figure 16.7 (a) Florence Nightingale reported on the data she collected as a nurse in the Crimean War. (b)Nightingale’s diagram shows the number of fatalities in soldiers by month of the conflict from various causes. Thetotal number dead in a particular month is equal to the area of the wedge for that month. The colored sections of thewedge represent different causes of death: wounds (pink), preventable infectious diseases (gray), and all othercauses (brown).7. O.M. Lidwell. “Joseph Lister and Infection from the Air.” Epidemiology and Infection 99 (1987): 569–578. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2249236/pdf/epidinfect00006-0004.pdf.712 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 16.8 Joseph Lister initiated the use of a carbolic acid (phenol) during surgeries. This illustration of a surgeryshows a pressurized canister of carbolic acid being sprayed over the surgical site.Visit the website (https://openstax.org/l/22theghostmap) for The Ghost Map,a book about Snow’s work related to the Broad Street pump cholera outbreak.John Snow’s own account of his work (https://openstax.org/l/22JohnSnowacco) has additional links and information.This CDC resource (https://openstax.org/l/22CDCpointsourc) further breaks downthe pattern expected from a point-source outbreak.Learn more about Nightingale’s wedge chart (https://openstax.org/l/22nightwedgecha) here.• Explain the difference between common source spread and propagated spread of disease.• Describe how the observations of John Snow, Florence Nightingale, and Joseph Lister led to improvementsin public health.Types of Epidemiological StudiesToday, epidemiologists make use of study designs, the manner in which data are gathered to test a hypothesis,similar to those of researchers studying other phenomena that occur in populations. These approaches can be dividedinto observational studies (in which subjects are not manipulated) and experimental studies (in which subjectsare manipulated). Collectively, these studies give modern-day epidemiologists multiple tools for exploring theconnections between infectious diseases and the populations of susceptible individuals they might infect.Observational StudiesIn an observational study, data are gathered from study participants through measurements (such as physiologicalvariables like white blood cell count), or answers to questions in interviews (such as recent travel or exerciseLink to LearningChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 713frequency). The subjects in an observational study are typically chosen at random from a population of affected orunaffected individuals. However, the subjects in an observational study are in no way manipulated by the researcher.Observational studies are typically easier to carry out than experimental studies, and in certain situations they may bethe only studies possible for ethical reasons.Observational studies are only able to measure associations between disease occurrence and possible causative agents;they do not necessarily prove a causal relationship. For example, suppose a study finds an association between heavycoffee drinking and lower incidence of skin cancer. This might suggest that coffee prevents skin cancer, but theremay be another unmeasured factor involved, such as the amount of sun exposure the participants receive. If it turnsout that coffee drinkers work more in offices and spend less time outside in the sun than those who drink less coffee,then it may be possible that the lower rate of skin cancer is due to less sun exposure, not to coffee consumption. Theobservational study cannot distinguish between these two potential causes.There are several useful approaches in observational studies. These include methods classified as descriptiveepidemiology and analytical epidemiology. Descriptive epidemiology gathers information about a disease outbreak,the affected individuals, and how the disease has spread over time in an exploratory stage of study. This type of studywill involve interviews with patients, their contacts, and their family members; examination of samples and medicalrecords; and even histories of food and beverages consumed. Such a study might be conducted while the outbreak isstill occurring. Descriptive studies might form the basis for developing a hypothesis of causation that could be testedby more rigorous observational and experimental studies.Analytical epidemiology employs carefully selected groups of individuals in an attempt to more convincinglyevaluate hypotheses about potential causes for a disease outbreak. The selection of cases is generally made at random,so the results are not biased because of some common characteristic of the study participants. Analytical studiesmay gather their data by going back in time (retrospective studies), or as events unfold forward in time (prospectivestudies).Retrospective studies gather data from the past on present-day cases. Data can include things like the medical history,age, gender, or occupational history of the affected individuals. This type of study examines associations betweenfactors chosen or available to the researcher and disease occurrence.Prospective studies follow individuals and monitor their disease state during the course of the study. Data on thecharacteristics of the study subjects and their environments are gathered at the beginning and during the study so thatsubjects who become ill may be compared with those who do not. Again, the researchers can look for associationsbetween the disease state and variables that were measured during the study to shed light on possible causes.Analytical studies incorporate groups into their designs to assist in teasing out associations with disease. Approachesto group-based analytical studies include cohort studies, case-control studies, and cross-sectional studies. The cohortmethod examines groups of individuals (called cohorts) who share a particular characteristic. For example, a cohortmight consist of individuals born in the same year and the same place; or it might consist of people who practice oravoid a particular behavior, e.g., smokers or nonsmokers. In a cohort study, cohorts can be followed prospectivelyor studied retrospectively. If only a single cohort is followed, then the affected individuals are compared with theunaffected individuals in the same group. Disease outcomes are recorded and analyzed to try to identify correlationsbetween characteristics of individuals in the cohort and disease incidence. Cohort studies are a useful way todetermine the causes of a condition without violating the ethical prohibition of exposing subjects to a risk factor.Cohorts are typically identified and defined based on suspected risk factors to which individuals have already beenexposed through their own choices or circumstances.Case-control studies are typically retrospective and compare a group of individuals with a disease to a similar groupof individuals without the disease. Case-control studies are far more efficient than cohort studies because researcherscan deliberately select subjects who are already affected with the disease as opposed to waiting to see which subjectsfrom a random sample will develop a disease.A cross-sectional study analyzes randomly selected individuals in a population and compares individuals affectedby a disease or condition to those unaffected at a single point in time. Subjects are compared to look for associationsbetween certain measurable variables and the disease or condition. Cross-sectional studies are also used to determine714 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the prevalence of a condition.Experimental StudiesExperimental epidemiology uses laboratory or clinical studies in which the investigator manipulates the studysubjects to study the connections between diseases and potential causative agents or to assess treatments. Examplesof treatments might be the administration of a drug, the inclusion or exclusion of different dietary items, physicalexercise, or a particular surgical procedure. Animals or humans are used as test subjects. Because experimentalstudies involve manipulation of subjects, they are typically more difficult and sometimes impossible for ethicalreasons.Koch’s postulates require experimental interventions to determine the causative agent for a disease. Unlikeobservational studies, experimental studies can provide strong evidence supporting cause because other factors aretypically held constant when the researcher manipulates the subject. The outcomes for one group receiving thetreatment are compared to outcomes for a group that does not receive the treatment but is treated the same in everyother way. For example, one group might receive a regimen of a drug administered as a pill, while the untreated groupreceives a placebo (a pill that looks the same but has no active ingredient). Both groups are treated as similarly aspossible except for the administration of the drug. Because other variables are held constant in both the treated andthe untreated groups, the researcher is more certain that any change in the treated group is a result of the specificmanipulation.Experimental studies provide the strongest evidence for the etiology of disease, but they must also be designedcarefully to eliminate subtle effects of bias. Typically, experimental studies with humans are conducted as doubleblindstudies, meaning neither the subjects nor the researchers know who is a treatment case and who is not. Thisdesign removes a well-known cause of bias in research called the placebo effect, in which knowledge of the treatmentby either the subject or the researcher can influence the outcomes.• Describe the advantages and disadvantages of observational studies and experimental studies.• Explain the ways that groups of subjects can be selected for analytical studies.Part 3Since laboratory tests had confirmed Salmonella, a common foodborne pathogen, as the etiologic agent,epidemiologists suspected that the outbreak was caused by contamination at a food processing facilityserving the region. Interviews with patients focused on food consumption during and after the Thanksgivingholiday, corresponding with the timing of the outbreak. During the interviews, patients were asked to list itemsconsumed at holiday gatherings and describe how widely each item was consumed among family membersand relatives. They were also asked about the sources of food items (e.g., brand, location of purchase, dateof purchase). By asking such questions, health officials hoped to identify patterns that would lead back to thesource of the outbreak.Analysis of the interview responses eventually linked almost all of the cases to consumption of a holiday dishknown as the turducken—a chicken stuffed inside a duck stuffed inside a turkey. Turducken is a dish notgenerally consumed year-round, which would explain the spike in cases just after the Thanksgiving holiday.Additional analysis revealed that the turduckens consumed by the affected patients were purchased alreadystuffed and ready to be cooked. Moreover, the pre-stuffed turduckens were all sold at the same regionalgrocery chain under two different brand names. Upon further investigation, officials traced both brands to aClinical FocusChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 715single processing plant that supplied stores throughout the Florida panhandle.• Is this an example of common source spread or propagated spread?• What next steps would the public health office likely take after identifying the source of the outbreak?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.16.3 Modes of Disease TransmissionLearning Objectives• Describe the different types of disease reservoirs• Compare contact, vector, and vehicle modes of transmission• Identify important disease vectors• Explain the prevalence of nosocomial infectionsUnderstanding how infectious pathogens spread is critical to preventing infectious disease. Many pathogens requirea living host to survive, while others may be able to persist in a dormant state outside of a living host. But havinginfected one host, all pathogens must also have a mechanism of transfer from one host to another or they will diewhen their host dies. Pathogens often have elaborate adaptations to exploit host biology, behavior, and ecology to livein and move between hosts. Hosts have evolved defenses against pathogens, but because their rates of evolution aretypically slower than their pathogens (because their generation times are longer), hosts are usually at an evolutionarydisadvantage. This section will explore where pathogens survive—both inside and outside hosts—and some of themany ways they move from one host to another.Reservoirs and CarriersFor pathogens to persist over long periods of time they require reservoirs where they normally reside. Reservoirscan be living organisms or nonliving sites. Nonliving reservoirs can include soil and water in the environment. Thesemay naturally harbor the organism because it may grow in that environment. These environments may also becomecontaminated with pathogens in human feces, pathogens shed by intermediate hosts, or pathogens contained in theremains of intermediate hosts.Pathogens may have mechanisms of dormancy or resilience that allow them to survive (but typically not to reproduce)for varying periods of time in nonliving environments. For example, Clostridium tetani survives in the soil and inthe presence of oxygen as a resistant endospore. Although many viruses are soon destroyed once in contact with air,water, or other non-physiological conditions, certain types are capable of persisting outside of a living cell for varyingamounts of time. For example, a study that looked at the ability of influenza viruses to infect a cell culture aftervarying amounts of time on a banknote showed survival times from 48 hours to 17 days, depending on how they weredeposited on the banknote.[8] On the other hand, cold-causing rhinoviruses are somewhat fragile, typically survivingless than a day outside of physiological fluids.A human acting as a reservoir of a pathogen may or may not be capable of transmitting the pathogen, dependingon the stage of infection and the pathogen. To help prevent the spread of disease among school children, the CDChas developed guidelines based on the risk of transmission during the course of the disease. For example, childrenwith chickenpox are considered contagious for five days from the start of the rash, whereas children with mostgastrointestinal illnesses should be kept home for 24 hours after the symptoms disappear.8. Yves Thomas, Guido Vogel, Werner Wunderli, Patricia Suter, Mark Witschi, Daniel Koch, Caroline Tapparel, and Laurent Kaiser.“Survival of Influenza Virus on Banknotes.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 74, no. 10 (2008): 3002–3007.716 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5An individual capable of transmitting a pathogen without displaying symptoms is referred to as a carrier. A passivecarrier is contaminated with the pathogen and can mechanically transmit it to another host; however, a passive carrieris not infected. For example, a health-care professional who fails to wash his hands after seeing a patient harboring aninfectious agent could become a passive carrier, transmitting the pathogen to another patient who becomes infected.By contrast, an active carrier is an infected individual who can transmit the disease to others. An active carriermay or may not exhibit signs or symptoms of infection. For example, active carriers may transmit the disease duringthe incubation period (before they show signs and symptoms) or the period of convalescence (after symptoms havesubsided). Active carriers who do not present signs or symptoms of disease despite infection are called asymptomaticcarriers. Pathogens such as hepatitis B virus, herpes simplex virus, and HIV are frequently transmitted byasymptomatic carriers. Mary Mallon, better known as Typhoid Mary, is a famous historical example of anasymptomatic carrier. An Irish immigrant, Mallon worked as a cook for households in and around New York Citybetween 1900 and 1915. In each household, the residents developed typhoid fever (caused by Salmonella typhi) afew weeks after Mallon started working. Later investigations determined that Mallon was responsible for at least 122cases of typhoid fever, five of which were fatal.[9] See Eye on Ethics: Typhoid Mary for more about the Malloncase.A pathogen may have more than one living reservoir. In zoonotic diseases, animals act as reservoirs of human diseaseand transmit the infectious agent to humans through direct or indirect contact. In some cases, the disease also affectsthe animal, but in other cases the animal is asymptomatic.In parasitic infections, the parasite’s preferred host is called the definitive host. In parasites with complex life cycles,the definitive host is the host in which the parasite reaches sexual maturity. Some parasites may also infect oneor more intermediate hosts in which the parasite goes through several immature life cycle stages or reproducesasexually.George Soper, the sanitary engineer who traced the typhoid outbreak to MaryMallon, gives an account (https://openstax.org/l/22geosopcurtyp) of hisinvestigation, an example of descriptive epidemiology, in “The Curious Career ofTyphoid Mary.”• List some nonliving reservoirs for pathogens.• Explain the difference between a passive carrier and an active carrier.TransmissionRegardless of the reservoir, transmission must occur for an infection to spread. First, transmission from the reservoirto the individual must occur. Then, the individual must transmit the infectious agent to other susceptible individuals,either directly or indirectly. Pathogenic microorganisms employ diverse transmission mechanisms.Link to Learning9. Filio Marineli, Gregory Tsoucalas, Marianna Karamanou, and George Androutsos. “Mary Mallon (1869–1938) and the History ofTyphoid Fever.” Annals of Gastroenterology 26 (2013): 132–134. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959940/pdf/AnnGastroenterol-26-132.pdf.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 717Contact TransmissionContact transmission includes direct contact or indirect contact. Person-to-person transmission is a form of directcontact transmission. Here the agent is transmitted by physical contact between two individuals (Figure 16.9)through actions such as touching, kissing, sexual intercourse, or droplet sprays. Direct contact can be categorizedas vertical, horizontal, or droplet transmission. Vertical direct contact transmission occurs when pathogens aretransmitted from mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or breastfeeding. Other kinds of direct contact transmissionare called horizontal direct contact transmission. Often, contact between mucous membranes is required for entryof the pathogen into the new host, although skin-to-skin contact can lead to mucous membrane contact if the newhost subsequently touches a mucous membrane. Contact transmission may also be site-specific; for example, somediseases can be transmitted by sexual contact but not by other forms of contact.When an individual coughs or sneezes, small droplets of mucus that may contain pathogens are ejected. This leadsto direct droplet transmission, which refers to droplet transmission of a pathogen to a new host over distances ofone meter or less. A wide variety of diseases are transmitted by droplets, including influenza and many forms ofpneumonia. Transmission over distances greater than one meter is called airborne transmission.Indirect contact transmission involves inanimate objects called fomites that become contaminated by pathogensfrom an infected individual or reservoir (Figure 16.10). For example, an individual with the common cold maysneeze, causing droplets to land on a fomite such as a tablecloth or carpet, or the individual may wipe her nose andthen transfer mucus to a fomite such as a doorknob or towel. Transmission occurs indirectly when a new susceptiblehost later touches the fomite and transfers the contaminated material to a susceptible portal of entry. Fomites canalso include objects used in clinical settings that are not properly sterilized, such as syringes, needles, catheters,and surgical equipment. Pathogens transmitted indirectly via such fomites are a major cause of healthcare-associatedinfections (see Controlling Microbial Growth).Figure 16.9 Direct contact transmission of pathogens can occur through physical contact. Many pathogens requirecontact with a mucous membrane to enter the body, but the host may transfer the pathogen from another point ofcontact (e.g., hand) to a mucous membrane (e.g., mouth or eye). (credit left: modification of work by Lisa Doehnert)Figure 16.10 Fomites are nonliving objects that facilitate the indirect transmission of pathogens. Contaminateddoorknobs, towels, and syringes are all common examples of fomites. (credit left: modification of work by Kate TerHaar; credit middle: modification of work by Vernon Swanepoel; credit right: modification of work by “Zaldylmg”/Flickr)718 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Vehicle TransmissionThe term vehicle transmission refers to the transmission of pathogens through vehicles such as water, food, andair. Water contamination through poor sanitation methods leads to waterborne transmission of disease. Waterbornedisease remains a serious problem in many regions throughout the world. The World Health Organization (WHO)estimates that contaminated drinking water is responsible for more than 500,000 deaths each year.[10] Similarly, foodcontaminated through poor handling or storage can lead to foodborne transmission of disease (Figure 16.11).Dust and fine particles known as aerosols, which can float in the air, can carry pathogens and facilitate the airbornetransmission of disease. For example, dust particles are the dominant mode of transmission of hantavirus to humans.Hantavirus is found in mouse feces, urine, and saliva, but when these substances dry, they can disintegrate into fineparticles that can become airborne when disturbed; inhalation of these particles can lead to a serious and sometimesfatal respiratory infection.Although droplet transmission over short distances is considered contact transmission as discussed above, longerdistance transmission of droplets through the air is considered vehicle transmission. Unlike larger particles that dropquickly out of the air column, fine mucus droplets produced by coughs or sneezes can remain suspended for longperiods of time, traveling considerable distances. In certain conditions, droplets desiccate quickly to produce a dropletnucleus that is capable of transmitting pathogens; air temperature and humidity can have an impact on effectivenessof airborne transmission.Tuberculosis is often transmitted via airborne transmission when the causative agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,is released in small particles with coughs. Because tuberculosis requires as few as 10 microbes to initiate a newinfection, patients with tuberculosis must be treated in rooms equipped with special ventilation, and anyone enteringthe room should wear a mask.Figure 16.11 Food is an important vehicle of transmission for pathogens, especially of the gastrointestinal andupper respiratory systems. Notice the glass shield above the food trays, designed to prevent pathogens ejected incoughs and sneezes from entering the food. (credit: Fort George G. Meade Public Affairs Office)ResolutionAfter identifying the source of the contaminated turduckens, the Florida public health office notified the CDC,which requested an expedited inspection of the facility by state inspectors. Inspectors found that a machineused to process the chicken was contaminated with Salmonella as a result of substandard cleaning protocols.Inspectors also found that the process of stuffing and packaging the turduckens prior to refrigeration allowedthe meat to remain at temperatures conducive to bacterial growth for too long. The contamination and theClinical Focus10. World Health Organization. Fact sheet No. 391—Drinking Water. June 2005. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs391/en.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 719delayed refrigeration led to vehicle (food) transmission of the bacteria in turduckens.Based on these findings, the plant was shut down for a full and thorough decontamination. All turduckensproduced in the plant were recalled and pulled from store shelves ahead of the December holiday season,preventing further outbreaks.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus Box.Vector TransmissionDiseases can also be transmitted by a mechanical or biological vector, an animal (typically an arthropod) that carriesthe disease from one host to another. Mechanical transmission is facilitated by a mechanical vector, an animal thatcarries a pathogen from one host to another without being infected itself. For example, a fly may land on fecal matterand later transmit bacteria from the feces to food that it lands on; a human eating the food may then become infectedby the bacteria, resulting in a case of diarrhea or dysentery (Figure 16.12).Biological transmission occurs when the pathogen reproduces within a biological vector that transmits the pathogenfrom one host to another (Figure 16.12). Arthropods are the main vectors responsible for biological transmission(Figure 16.13). Most arthropod vectors transmit the pathogen by biting the host, creating a wound that serves asa portal of entry. The pathogen may go through part of its reproductive cycle in the gut or salivary glands of thearthropod to facilitate its transmission through the bite. For example, hemipterans (called “kissing bugs” or “assassinbugs”) transmit Chagas disease to humans by defecating when they bite, after which the human scratches or rubs theinfected feces into a mucous membrane or break in the skin.Biological insect vectors include mosquitoes, which transmit malaria and other diseases, and lice, which transmittyphus. Other arthropod vectors can include arachnids, primarily ticks, which transmit Lyme disease and otherdiseases, and mites, which transmit scrub typhus and rickettsial pox. Biological transmission, because it involvessurvival and reproduction within a parasitized vector, complicates the biology of the pathogen and its transmission.There are also important non-arthropod vectors of disease, including mammals and birds. Various species of mammalscan transmit rabies to humans, usually by means of a bite that transmits the rabies virus. Chickens and other domesticpoultry can transmit avian influenza to humans through direct or indirect contact with avian influenza virus A shed inthe birds’ saliva, mucous, and feces.720 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 16.12 (a) A mechanical vector carries a pathogen on its body from one host to another, not as an infection.(b) A biological vector carries a pathogen from one host to another after becoming infected itself.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 721Figure 16.13 (credit “Black fly”, “Tick”, “Tsetse fly”: modification of work by USDA; credit: “Flea”: modification of workby Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit: “Louse”, “Mosquito”, “Sand fly”: modification of work by JamesGathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “Kissing bug”: modification of work by Glenn Seplak;credit “Mite”: modification of work by Michael Wunderli)722 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Describe how diseases can be transmitted through the air.• Explain the difference between a mechanical vector and a biological vector.Using GMOs to Stop the Spread of ZikaIn 2016, an epidemic of the Zika virus was linked to a high incidence of birth defects in South America andCentral America. As winter turned to spring in the northern hemisphere, health officials correctly predicted thevirus would spread to North America, coinciding with the breeding season of its major vector, the Aedes aegyptimosquito.The range of the A. aegypti mosquito extends well into the southern United States (Figure 16.14). Becausethese same mosquitoes serve as vectors for other problematic diseases (dengue fever, yellow fever, andothers), various methods of mosquito control have been proposed as solutions. Chemical pesticides havebeen used effectively in the past, and are likely to be used again; but because chemical pesticides can havenegative impacts on the environment, some scientists have proposed an alternative that involves geneticallyengineering A. aegypti so that it cannot reproduce. This method, however, has been the subject of somecontroversy.One method that has worked in the past to control pests, with little apparent downside, has been sterile maleintroductions. This method controlled the screw-worm fly pest in the southwest United States and fruit fly pestsof fruit crops. In this method, males of the target species are reared in the lab, sterilized with radiation, andreleased into the environment where they mate with wild females, who subsequently bear no live offspring.Repeated releases shrink the pest population.A similar method, taking advantage of recombinant DNA technology,[11] introduces a dominant lethal alleleinto male mosquitoes that is suppressed in the presence of tetracycline (an antibiotic) during laboratoryrearing. The males are released into the environment and mate with female mosquitoes. Unlike the sterilemale method, these matings produce offspring, but they die as larvae from the lethal gene in the absence oftetracycline in the environment. As of 2016, this method has yet to be implemented in the United States, buta UK company tested the method in Piracicaba, Brazil, and found an 82% reduction in wild A. aegypti larvaeand a 91% reduction in dengue cases in the treated area.[12] In August 2016, amid news of Zika infectionsin several Florida communities, the FDA gave the UK company permission to test this same mosquito controlmethod in Key West, Florida, pending compliance with local and state regulations and a referendum in theaffected communities.The use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to control a disease vector has its advocates as wellas its opponents. In theory, the system could be used to drive the A. aegypti mosquito extinct—a noblegoal according to some, given the damage they do to human populations.[13] But opponents of the idea areconcerned that the gene could escape the species boundary of A. aegypti and cause problems in otherspecies, leading to unforeseen ecological consequences. Opponents are also wary of the program because itis being administered by a for-profit corporation, creating the potential for conflicts of interest that would haveto be tightly regulated; and it is not clear how any unintended consequences of the program could be reversed.There are other epidemiological considerations as well. Aedes aegypti is apparently not the only vector for theZika virus. Aedes albopictus, the Asian tiger mosquito, is also a vector for the Zika virus.[14] A. albopictus isnow widespread around the planet including much of the United States (Figure 16.14). Many other mosquitoesEye on EthicsChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 723have been found to harbor Zika virus, though their capacity to act as vectors is unknown.[15] Geneticallymodified strains of A. aegypti will not control the other species of vectors. Finally, the Zika virus can apparentlybe transmitted sexually between human hosts, from mother to child, and possibly through blood transfusion.All of these factors must be considered in any approach to controlling the spread of the virus.Clearly there are risks and unknowns involved in conducting an open-environment experiment of an as-yetpoorly understood technology. But allowing the Zika virus to spread unchecked is also risky. Does the threatof a Zika epidemic justify the ecological risk of genetically engineering mosquitos? Are current methods ofmosquito control sufficiently ineffective or harmful that we need to try untested alternatives? These are thequestions being put to public health officials now.Figure 16.14 The Zika virus is an enveloped virus transmitted by mosquitoes, especially Aedes aegypti. Therange of this mosquito includes much of the United States, from the Southwest and Southeast to as far northas the Mid-Atlantic. The range of A. albopictus, another vector, extends even farther north to New Englandand parts of the Midwest. (credit micrograph: modification of work by Cynthia Goldsmith, Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention; credit photo: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Controland Prevention; credit map: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)QuarantiningIndividuals suspected or known to have been exposed to certain contagious pathogens may be quarantined, or11. Blandine Massonnet-Bruneel, Nicole Corre-Catelin, Renaud Lacroix, Rosemary S. Lees, Kim Phuc Hoang, Derric Nimmo, LukeAlphey, and Paul Reiter. “Fitness of Transgenic Mosquito Aedes aegypti Males Carrying a Dominant Lethal Genetic System.” PLOS ONE 8,no. 5 (2013): e62711.12. Richard Levine. “Cases of Dengue Drop 91 Percent Due to Genetically Modified Mosquitoes.” Entomology Today.https://entomologytoday.org/2016/07/14/cases-of-dengue-drop-91-due-to-genetically-modified-mosquitoes.13. Olivia Judson. “A Bug’s Death.” The New York Times, September 25, 2003. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/25/opinion/a-bug-sdeath.html.14. Gilda Grard, Mélanie Caron, Illich Manfred Mombo, Dieudonné Nkoghe, Statiana Mboui Ondo, Davy Jiolle, Didier Fontenille,Christophe Paupy, and Eric Maurice Leroy. “Zika Virus in Gabon (Central Africa)–2007: A New Threat from Aedes albopictus?” PLOSNeglected Tropical Diseases 8, no. 2 (2014): e2681.15. Constância F.J. Ayres. “Identification of Zika Virus Vectors and Implications for Control.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 16, no. 3(2016): 278–279.724 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5isolated to prevent transmission of the disease to others. Hospitals and other health-care facilities generally set upspecial wards to isolate patients with particularly hazardous diseases such as tuberculosis or Ebola (Figure 16.15).Depending on the setting, these wards may be equipped with special air-handling methods, and personnel mayimplement special protocols to limit the risk of transmission, such as personal protective equipment or the use ofchemical disinfectant sprays upon entry and exit of medical personnel.The duration of the quarantine depends on factors such as the incubation period of the disease and the evidencesuggestive of an infection. The patient may be released if signs and symptoms fail to materialize when expected or ifpreventive treatment can be administered in order to limit the risk of transmission. If the infection is confirmed, thepatient may be compelled to remain in isolation until the disease is no longer considered contagious.In the United States, public health authorities may only quarantine patients for certain diseases, such as cholera,diphtheria, infectious tuberculosis, and strains of influenza capable of causing a pandemic. Individuals entering theUnited States or moving between states may be quarantined by the CDC if they are suspected of having been exposedto one of these diseases. Although the CDC routinely monitors entry points to the United States for crew or passengersdisplaying illness, quarantine is rarely implemented.Figure 16.15 (a) The Aeromedical Biological Containment System (ABCS) is a module designed by the CDC andDepartment of Defense specifically for transporting highly contagious patients by air. (b) An isolation ward for Ebolapatients in Lagos, Nigeria. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:modification of work by CDC Global)Healthcare-Associated (Nosocomial) InfectionsHospitals, retirement homes, and prisons attract the attention of epidemiologists because these settings are associatedwith increased incidence of certain diseases. Higher rates of transmission may be caused by characteristics of theenvironment itself, characteristics of the population, or both. Consequently, special efforts must be taken to limit therisks of infection in these settings.Infections acquired in health-care facilities, including hospitals, are called nosocomial infections or healthcareassociatedinfections (HAI). HAIs are often connected with surgery or other invasive procedures that provide thepathogen with access to the portal of infection. For an infection to be classified as an HAI, the patient must havebeen admitted to the health-care facility for a reason other than the infection. In these settings, patients suffering fromprimary disease are often afflicted with compromised immunity and are more susceptible to secondary infection andopportunistic pathogens.In 2011, more than 720,000 HAIs occurred in hospitals in the United States, according to the CDC. About 22%of these HAIs occurred at a surgical site, and cases of pneumonia accounted for another 22%; urinary tractinfections accounted for an additional 13%, and primary bloodstream infections 10%.[16] Such HAIs often occur when16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “HAI Data and Statistics.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hai/surveillance. Accessed Jan 2,Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 725pathogens are introduced to patients’ bodies through contaminated surgical or medical equipment, such as cathetersand respiratory ventilators. Health-care facilities seek to limit nosocomial infections through training and hygieneprotocols such as those described in Control of Microbial Growth.• Give some reasons why HAIs occur.16.4 Global Public HealthLearning Objectives• Describe the entities involved in international public health and their activities• Identify and differentiate between emerging and reemerging infectious diseasesA large number of international programs and agencies are involved in efforts to promote global public health. Amongtheir goals are developing infrastructure in health care, public sanitation, and public health capacity; monitoringinfectious disease occurrences around the world; coordinating communications between national public healthagencies in various countries; and coordinating international responses to major health crises. In large part, theseinternational efforts are necessary because disease-causing microorganisms know no national boundaries.The World Health Organization (WHO)International public health issues are coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO), an agency of theUnited Nations. Of its roughly $4 billion budget for 2015–16[17], about $1 billion was funded by member statesand the remaining $3 billion by voluntary contributions. In addition to monitoring and reporting on infectiousdisease, WHO also develops and implements strategies for their control and prevention. WHO has had a number ofsuccessful international public health campaigns. For example, its vaccination program against smallpox, begun inthe mid-1960s, resulted in the global eradication of the disease by 1980. WHO continues to be involved in infectiousdisease control, primarily in the developing world, with programs targeting malaria, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis,among others. It also runs programs to reduce illness and mortality that occur as a result of violence, accidents,lifestyle-associated illnesses such as diabetes, and poor health-care infrastructure.WHO maintains a global alert and response system that coordinates information from member nations. In the eventof a public health emergency or epidemic, it provides logistical support and coordinates international response tothe emergency. The United States contributes to this effort through the CDC. The CDC carries out internationalmonitoring and public health efforts, mainly in the service of protecting US public health in an increasingly connectedworld. Similarly, the European Union maintains a Health Security Committee that monitors disease outbreaks withinits member countries and internationally, coordinating with WHO.• Name the organizations that participate in international public health monitoring.2016.17. World Health Organization. “Programme Budget 2014–2015.” http://www.who.int/about/finances-accountability/budget/en.726 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Emerging and Reemerging Infectious DiseasesBoth WHO and some national public health agencies such as the CDC monitor and prepare for emerging infectiousdiseases. An emerging infectious disease is either new to the human population or has shown an increase inprevalence in the previous twenty years. Whether the disease is new or conditions have changed to cause an increasein frequency, its status as emerging implies the need to apply resources to understand and control its growing impact.Emerging diseases may change their frequency gradually over time, or they may experience sudden epidemic growth.The importance of vigilance was made clear during the Ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in western Africa through2014–2015. Although health experts had been aware of the Ebola virus since the 1970s, an outbreak on such a largescale had never happened before (Figure 16.16). Previous human epidemics had been small, isolated, and contained.Indeed, the gorilla and chimpanzee populations of western Africa had suffered far worse from Ebola than the humanpopulation. The pattern of small isolated human epidemics changed in 2014. Its high transmission rate, coupled withcultural practices for treatment of the dead and perhaps its emergence in an urban setting, caused the disease to spreadrapidly, and thousands of people died. The international public health community responded with a large emergencyeffort to treat patients and contain the epidemic.Emerging diseases are found in all countries, both developed and developing (Table 16.2). Some nations are betterequipped to deal with them. National and international public health agencies watch for epidemics like the Ebolaoutbreak in developing countries because those countries rarely have the health-care infrastructure and expertise todeal with large outbreaks effectively. Even with the support of international agencies, the systems in western Africastruggled to identify and care for the sick and control spread. In addition to the altruistic goal of saving lives andassisting nations lacking in resources, the global nature of transportation means that an outbreak anywhere can spreadquickly to every corner of the planet. Managing an epidemic in one location—its source—is far easier than fightingit on many fronts.Ebola is not the only disease that needs to be monitored in the global environment. In 2015, WHO set priorities onseveral emerging diseases that had a high probability of causing epidemics and that were poorly understood (and thusurgently required research and development efforts).A reemerging infectious disease is a disease that is increasing in frequency after a previous period of decline. Itsreemergence may be a result of changing conditions or old prevention regimes that are no longer working. Examplesof such diseases are drug-resistant forms of tuberculosis, bacterial pneumonia, and malaria. Drug-resistant strainsof the bacteria causing gonorrhea and syphilis are also becoming more widespread, raising concerns of untreatableinfections.Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 727Figure 16.16 Even before the Ebola epidemic of 2014–15, Ebola was considered an emerging disease because ofseveral smaller outbreaks between the mid-1990s and 2000s.Some Emerging and Reemerging Infectious DiseasesDisease Pathogen YearDiscoveredAffected Regions TransmissionAIDS HIV 1981 Worldwide Contact with infectedbody fluidsChikungunyafeverChikungunyavirus1952 Africa, Asia, India; spreading toEurope and the AmericasMosquito-borneEbola virusdiseaseEbola virus 1976 Central and Western Africa Contact with infectedbody fluidsH1N1Influenza(swine flu)H1N1 virus 2009 Worldwide Droplet transmissionLymediseaseBorreliaburgdorferibacterium1981 Northern hemisphere From mammalreservoirs to humansby tick vectorsWest Nilevirus diseaseWest Nilevirus1937 Africa, Australia, Canada toVenezuela, Europe, Middle East,Western AsiaMosquito-borneTable 16.2728 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain why it is important to monitor emerging infectious diseases.• Explain how a bacterial disease could reemerge, even if it had previously been successfully treated andcontrolled.SARS Outbreak and IdentificationOn November 16, 2002, the first case of a SARS outbreak was reported in Guangdong Province, China. Thepatient exhibited influenza-like symptoms such as fever, cough, myalgia, sore throat, and shortness of breath.As the number of cases grew, the Chinese government was reluctant to openly communicate informationabout the epidemic with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the international community. The slowreaction of Chinese public health officials to this new disease contributed to the spread of the epidemicwithin and later outside China. In April 2003, the Chinese government finally responded with a huge publichealth effort involving quarantines, medical checkpoints, and massive cleaning projects. Over 18,000 peoplewere quarantined in Beijing alone. Large funding initiatives were created to improve health-care facilities,and dedicated outbreak teams were created to coordinate the response. By August 16, 2003, the last SARSpatients were released from a hospital in Beijing nine months after the first case was reported in China.In the meantime, SARS spread to other countries on its way to becoming a global pandemic. Though theinfectious agent had yet to be identified, it was thought to be an influenza virus. The disease was namedSARS, an acronym for severe acute respiratory syndrome, until the etiologic agent could be identified. Travelrestrictions to Southeast Asia were enforced by many countries. By the end of the outbreak, there were8,098 cases and 774 deaths worldwide. China and Hong Kong were hit hardest by the epidemic, but Taiwan,Singapore, and Toronto, Canada, also saw significant numbers of cases.Fortunately, timely public health responses in many countries effectively suppressed the outbreak and led toits eventual containment. For example, the disease was introduced to Canada in February 2003 by an infectedtraveler from Hong Kong, who died shortly after being hospitalized. By the end of March, hospital isolationand home quarantine procedures were in place in the Toronto area, stringent anti-infection protocols wereintroduced in hospitals, and the media were actively reporting on the disease. Public health officials trackeddown contacts of infected individuals and quarantined them. A total of 25,000 individuals were quarantined inthe city. Thanks to the vigorous response of the Canadian public health community, SARS was brought undercontrol in Toronto by June, a mere four months after it was introduced.In 2003, WHO established a collaborative effort to identify the causative agent of SARS, which has now beenidentified as a coronavirus that was associated with horseshoe bats. The genome of the SARS virus wassequenced and published by researchers at the CDC and in Canada in May 2003, and in the same monthresearchers in the Netherlands confirmed the etiology of the disease by fulfilling Koch’s postulates for theSARS coronavirus. The last known case of SARS worldwide was reported in 2004.Micro ConnectionsChapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology 729This database (https://openstax.org/l/22dataoutinfdis) of reports chroniclesoutbreaks of infectious disease around the world. It was on this system that thefirst information about the SARS outbreak in China emerged.The CDC publishes Emerging Infectious Diseases (https://openstax.org/l/22CDCEmerinfdis) , a monthly journal available online.Summary16.1 The Language of Epidemiologists• Epidemiology is the science underlying public health.• Morbidity means being in a state of illness, whereas mortality refers to death; both morbidity rates andmortality rates are of interest to epidemiologists.• Incidence is the number of new cases (morbidity or mortality), usually expressed as a proportion, during aspecified time period; prevalence is the total number affected in the population, again usually expressed as aproportion.• Sporadic diseases only occur rarely and largely without a geographic focus. Endemic diseases occur at aconstant (and often low) level within a population. Epidemic diseases and pandemic diseases occur when anoutbreak occurs on a significantly larger than expected level, either locally or globally, respectively.• Koch’s postulates specify the procedure for confirming a particular pathogen as the etiologic agent of aparticular disease. Koch’s postulates have limitations in application if the microbe cannot be isolated andcultured or if there is no animal host for the microbe. In this case, molecular Koch’s postulates would beutilized.• In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention monitors notifiable diseases andpublishes weekly updates in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.16.2 Tracking Infectious Diseases• Early pioneers of epidemiology such as John Snow, Florence Nightingale, and Joseph Lister, studied diseaseat the population level and used data to disrupt disease transmission.• Descriptive epidemiology studies rely on case analysis and patient histories to gain information aboutoutbreaks, frequently while they are still occurring.• Retrospective epidemiology studies use historical data to identify associations with the disease state ofpresent cases. Prospective epidemiology studies gather data and follow cases to find associations with futuredisease states.• Analytical epidemiology studies are observational studies that are carefully designed to compare groups anduncover associations between environmental or genetic factors and disease.• Experimental epidemiology studies generate strong evidence of causation in disease or treatment bymanipulating subjects and comparing them with control subjects.16.3 Modes of Disease Transmission• Reservoirs of human disease can include the human and animal populations, soil, water, and inanimateobjects or materials.• Contact transmission can be direct or indirect through physical contact with either an infected host (direct)or contact with a fomite that an infected host has made contact with previously (indirect).• Vector transmission occurs when a living organism carries an infectious agent on its body (mechanical) or asan infection host itself (biological), to a new host.Link to Learning730 Chapter 16 | Disease and EpidemiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Vehicle transmission occurs when a substance, such as soil, water, or air, carries an infectious agent to a newhost.• Healthcare-associated infections (HAI), or nosocomial infections, are acquired in a clinical setting.Transmission is facilitated by medical interventions and the high concentration of susceptible,immunocompromised individuals in clinical settings.16.4 Global Public Health• The World Health Organization (WHO) is an agency of the United Nations that collects and analyzes dataon disease occurrence from member nations. WHO also coordinates public health programs and responses tointernational health emergencies.• Emerging diseases are those that are new to human populations or that have been increasing in the pasttwo decades. Reemerging diseases are those that are making a resurgence in susceptible populations afterpreviously having been controlled in some geographic areas.