Chapter 14Antimicrobial DrugsFigure 14.1 First mass produced in the 1940s, penicillin was instrumental in saving millions of lives during WorldWar II and was considered a wonder drug.[1] Today, overprescription of antibiotics (especially for childhood illnesses)has contributed to the evolution of drug-resistant pathogens. (credit left: modification of work by Chemical HeritageFoundation; credit right: modification of work by U.S. Department of Defense)Chapter Outline14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial Discovery14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial Drugs14.5 Drug Resistance14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of Antimicrobials14.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial DiscoveryIntroductionIn nature, some microbes produce substances that inhibit or kill other microbes that might otherwise compete for thesame resources. Humans have successfully exploited these abilities, using microbes to mass-produce substances thatcan be used as antimicrobial drugs. Since their discovery, antimicrobial drugs have saved countless lives, and theyremain an essential tool for treating and controlling infectious disease. But their widespread and often unnecessaryuse has had an unintended side effect: the rise of multidrug-resistant microbial strains. In this chapter, we will discusshow antimicrobial drugs work, why microbes develop resistance, and what health professionals can do to encourageresponsible use of antimicrobials.14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial1. “Treatment of War Wounds: A Historical Review.” Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 467 no. 8 (2009):2168–2191.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 607DiscoveryLearning Objectives• Compare and contrast natural, semisynthetic, and synthetic antimicrobial drugs• Describe the chemotherapeutic approaches of ancient societies• Describe the historically important individuals and events that led to the development of antimicrobial drugsMost people associate the term chemotherapy with treatments for cancer. However, chemotherapy is actually abroader term that refers to any use of chemicals or drugs to treat disease. Chemotherapy may involve drugs that targetcancerous cells or tissues, or it may involve antimicrobial drugs that target infectious microorganisms. Antimicrobialdrugs typically work by destroying or interfering with microbial structures and enzymes, either killing microbial cellsor inhibiting of their growth. But before we examine how these drugs work, we will briefly explore the history ofhumans’ use of antimicrobials for the purpose of chemotherapy.Use of Antimicrobials in Ancient SocietiesAlthough the discovery of antimicrobials and their subsequent widespread use is commonly associated with modernmedicine, there is evidence that humans have been exposed to antimicrobial compounds for millennia. Chemicalanalyses of the skeletal remains of people from Nubia[2] (now found in present-day Sudan) dating from between350 and 550 AD have shown residue of the antimicrobial agent tetracycline in high enough quantities to suggest thepurposeful fermentation of tetracycline-producing Streptomyces during the beer-making process. The resulting beer,which was thick and gruel-like, was used to treat a variety of ailments in both adults and children, including gumdisease and wounds. The antimicrobial properties of certain plants may also have been recognized by various culturesaround the world, including Indian and Chinese herbalists (Figure 14.2) who have long used plants for a widevariety of medical purposes. Healers of many cultures understood the antimicrobial properties of fungi and their useof moldy bread or other mold-containing products to treat wounds has been well documented for centuries.[3] Today,Part 1Marisa, a 52-year-old woman, was suffering from severe abdominal pain, swollen lymph nodes, fatigue,and a fever. She had just returned home from visiting extended family in her native country of Cambodia.While abroad, she received medical care in neighboring Vietnam for a compressed spinal cord. She still haddiscomfort when leaving Cambodia, but the pain increased as her trip home continued and her husband droveher straight from the airport to the emergency room.Her doctor considers whether Marisa could be suffering from appendicitis, a urinary tract infection (UTI), orpelvic inflammatory disease (PID). However, each of those conditions is typically preceded or accompanied byadditional symptoms. He considers the treatment she received in Vietnam for her compressed spinal cord, butabdominal pain is not usually associated with spinal cord compression. He examines her health history further.• What type of infection or other condition may be responsible?• What type of lab tests might the doctor order?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus2. M.L. Nelson et al. “Brief Communication: Mass Spectroscopic Characterization of Tetracycline in the Skeletal Remains of an AncientPopulation from Sudanese Nubia 350–550 CE.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 143 no. 1 (2010):151–154.3. M. Wainwright. “Moulds in Ancient and More Recent Medicine.” Mycologist 3 no. 1 (1989):21–23.608 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5while about 80% of the world’s population still relies on plant-derived medicines,[4] scientists are now discoveringthe active compounds conferring the medicinal benefits contained in many of these traditionally used plants.Figure 14.2 For millennia, Chinese herbalists have used many different species of plants for the treatment of a widevariety of human ailments.• Give examples of how antimicrobials were used in ancient societies.The First Antimicrobial DrugsSocieties relied on traditional medicine for thousands of years; however, the first half of the 20th century broughtan era of strategic drug discovery. In the early 1900s, the German physician and scientist Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915)set out to discover or synthesize chemical compounds capable of killing infectious microbes without harmingthe patient. In 1909, after screening more than 600 arsenic-containing compounds, Ehrlich’s assistant SahachiroHata (1873–1938) found one such “magic bullet.” Compound 606 targeted the bacterium Treponema pallidum, thecausative agent of syphilis. Compound 606 was found to successfully cure syphilis in rabbits and soon after wasmarketed under the name Salvarsan as a remedy for the disease in humans (Figure 14.3). Ehrlich’s innovativeapproach of systematically screening a wide variety of compounds remains a common strategy for the discovery ofnew antimicrobial agents even today.4. S. Verma, S.P. Singh. “Current and Future Status of Herbal Medicines.” Veterinary World 1 no. 11 (2008):347–350.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 609Figure 14.3 Paul Ehrlich was influential in the discovery of Compound 606, an antimicrobial agent that proved to bean effective treatment for syphilis.A few decades later, German scientists Josef Klarer, Fritz Mietzsch, and Gerhard Domagk discovered the antibacterialactivity of a synthetic dye, prontosil, that could treat streptococcal and staphylococcal infections in mice. Domagk’sown daughter was one of the first human recipients of the drug, which completely cured her of a severe streptococcalinfection that had resulted from a poke with an embroidery needle. Gerhard Domagk (1895–1964) was awardedthe Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939 for his work with prontosil and sulfanilamide, the active breakdown productof prontosil in the body. Sulfanilamide, the first synthetic antimicrobial created, served as the foundation for thechemical development of a family of sulfa drugs. A synthetic antimicrobial is a drug that is developed from achemical not found in nature. The success of the sulfa drugs led to the discovery and production of additionalimportant classes of synthetic antimicrobials, including the quinolines and oxazolidinones.A few years before the discovery of prontosil, scientist Alexander Fleming (1881–1955) made his own accidentaldiscovery that turned out to be monumental. In 1928, Fleming returned from holiday and examined some old platesof staphylococci in his research laboratory at St. Mary’s Hospital in London. He observed that contaminating moldgrowth (subsequently identified as a strain of Penicillium notatum) inhibited staphylococcal growth on one plate.Fleming, therefore, is credited with the discovery of penicillin, the first natural antibiotic, (Figure 14.4). Furtherexperimentation showed that penicillin from the mold was antibacterial against streptococci, meningococci, andCorynebacterium diphtheriae, the causative agent of diphtheria.Fleming and his colleagues were credited with discovering and identifying penicillin, but its isolation and massproduction were accomplished by a team of researchers at Oxford University under the direction of Howard Florey(1898–1968) and Ernst Chain (1906–1979) (Figure 14.4). In 1940, the research team purified penicillin and reportedits success as an antimicrobial agent against streptococcal infections in mice. Their subsequent work with humansubjects also showed penicillin to be very effective. Because of their important work, Fleming, Florey, and Chainwere awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1945.In the early 1940s, scientist Dorothy Hodgkin (1910–1994), who studied crystallography at Oxford University, usedX-rays to analyze the structure of a variety of natural products. In 1946, she determined the structure of penicillin,for which she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964. Once the structure was understood, scientists couldmodify it to produce a variety of semisynthetic penicillins. A semisynthetic antimicrobial is a chemically modifiedderivative of a natural antibiotic. The chemical modifications are generally designed to increase the range of bacteria610 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5targeted, increase stability, decrease toxicity, or confer other properties beneficial for treating infections.Penicillin is only one example of a natural antibiotic. Also in the 1940s, Selman Waksman (1888–1973) (Figure14.5), a prominent soil microbiologist at Rutgers University, led a research team that discovered severalantimicrobials, including actinomycin, streptomycin, and neomycin. The discoveries of these antimicrobials stemmedfrom Waksman’s study of fungi and the Actinobacteria, including soil bacteria in the genus Streptomyces, known fortheir natural production of a wide variety of antimicrobials. His work earned him the Nobel Prize in Physiology andMedicine in 1952. The actinomycetes are the source of more than half of all natural antibiotics[5] and continue to serveas an excellent reservoir for the discovery of novel antimicrobial agents. Some researchers argue that we have not yetcome close to tapping the full antimicrobial potential of this group.[6]Figure 14.4 (a) Alexander Fleming was the first to discover a naturally produced antimicrobial, penicillin, in 1928. (b)Howard Florey and Ernst Chain discovered how to scale up penicillin production. Then they figured out how to purifyit and showed its efficacy as an antimicrobial in animal and human trials in the early 1940s.5. J. Berdy. “Bioactive Microbial Metabolites.” The Journal of Antibiotics 58 no. 1 (2005):1–26.6. M. Baltz. “Antimicrobials from Actinomycetes: Back to the Future.” Microbe 2 no. 3 (2007):125–131.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 611Figure 14.5 Selman Waksman was the first to show the vast antimicrobial production capabilities of a group of soilbacteria, the actinomycetes.• Why is the soil a reservoir for antimicrobial resistance genes?14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial ChemotherapyLearning Objectives• Contrast bacteriostatic versus bactericidal antibacterial activities• Contrast broad-spectrum drugs versus narrow-spectrum drugs• Explain the significance of superinfections• Discuss the significance of dosage and the route of administration of a drug• Identify factors and variables that can influence the side effects of a drug• Describe the significance of positive and negative interactions between drugsSeveral factors are important in choosing the most appropriate antimicrobial drug therapy, including bacteriostaticversus bactericidal mechanisms, spectrum of activity, dosage and route of administration, the potential for sideeffects, and the potential interactions between drugs. The following discussion will focus primarily on antibacterialdrugs, but the concepts translate to other antimicrobial classes.Bacteriostatic Versus BactericidalAntibacterial drugs can be either bacteriostatic or bactericidal in their interactions with target bacteria. Bacteriostaticdrugs cause a reversible inhibition of growth, with bacterial growth restarting after elimination of the drug. Bycontrast, bactericidal drugs kill their target bacteria. The decision of whether to use a bacteriostatic or bactericidal612 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5drugs depends on the type of infection and the immune status of the patient. In a patient with strong immunedefenses, bacteriostatic and bactericidal drugs can be effective in achieving clinical cure. However, when a patientis immunocompromised, a bactericidal drug is essential for the successful treatment of infections. Regardless of theimmune status of the patient, life-threatening infections such as acute endocarditis require the use of a bactericidaldrug.Spectrum of ActivityThe spectrum of activity of an antibacterial drug relates to diversity of targeted bacteria. A narrow-spectrumantimicrobial targets only specific subsets of bacterial pathogens. For example, some narrow-spectrum drugs onlytarget gram-positive bacteria, whereas others target only gram-negative bacteria. If the pathogen causing an infectionhas been identified, it is best to use a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial and minimize collateral damage to the normalmicrobiota. A broad-spectrum antimicrobial targets a wide variety of bacterial pathogens, including both grampositiveand gram-negative species, and is frequently used as empiric therapy to cover a wide range of potentialpathogens while waiting on the laboratory identification of the infecting pathogen. Broad-spectrum antimicrobials arealso used for polymicrobic infections (mixed infection with multiple bacterial species), or as prophylactic preventionof infections with surgery/invasive procedures. Finally, broad-spectrum antimicrobials may be selected to treat aninfection when a narrow-spectrum drug fails because of development of drug resistance by the target pathogen.The risk associated with using broad-spectrum antimicrobials is that they will also target a broad spectrum of thenormal microbiota, increasing the risk of a superinfection, a secondary infection in a patient having a preexistinginfection. A superinfection develops when the antibacterial intended for the preexisting infection kills the protectivemicrobiota, allowing another pathogen resistant to the antibacterial to proliferate and cause a secondary infection(Figure 14.6). Common examples of superinfections that develop as a result of antimicrobial usage include yeastinfections (candidiasis) and pseudomembranous colitis caused by Clostridium difficile, which can be fatal.Figure 14.6 Broad-spectrum antimicrobial use may lead to the development of a superinfection. (credit: modificationof work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is a superinfection and how does one arise?Dosage and Route of AdministrationThe amount of medication given during a certain time interval is the dosage, and it must be determined carefully toensure that optimum therapeutic drug levels are achieved at the site of infection without causing significant toxicity(side effects) to the patient. Each drug class is associated with a variety of potential side effects, and some of theseare described for specific drugs later in this chapter. Despite best efforts to optimize dosing, allergic reactions andother potentially serious side effects do occur. Therefore, the goal is to select the optimum dosage that will minimizeChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 613the risk of side effects while still achieving clinical cure, and there are important factors to consider when selectingthe best dose and dosage interval. For example, in children, dose is based upon the patient’s mass. However, thesame is not true for adults and children 12 years of age and older, for which there is typically a single standard doseregardless of the patient’s mass. With the great variability in adult body mass, some experts have argued that massshould be considered for all patients when determining appropriate dosage.[7] An additional consideration is howdrugs are metabolized and eliminated from the body. In general, patients with a history of liver or kidney dysfunctionmay experience reduced drug metabolism or clearance from the body, resulting in increased drug levels that may leadto toxicity and make them more prone to side effects.There are also some factors specific to the drugs themselves that influence appropriate dose and time interval betweendoses. For example, the half-life, or rate at which 50% of a drug is eliminated from the plasma, can vary significantlybetween drugs. Some drugs have a short half-life of only 1 hour and must be given multiple times a day, whereas otherdrugs have half-lives exceeding 12 hours and can be given as a single dose every 24 hours. Although a longer half-lifecan be considered an advantage for an antibacterial when it comes to convenient dosing intervals, the longer half-lifecan also be a concern for a drug that has serious side effects because drug levels may remain toxic for a longer time.Last, some drugs are dose dependent, meaning they are more effective when administered in large doses to providehigh levels for a short time at the site of infection. Others are time dependent, meaning they are more effective whenlower optimum levels are maintained over a longer period of time.The route of administration, the method used to introduce a drug into the body, is also an important consideration fordrug therapy. Drugs that can be administered orally are generally preferred because patients can more convenientlytake these drugs at home. However, some drugs are not absorbed easily from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract into thebloodstream. These drugs are often useful for treating diseases of the intestinal tract, such as tapeworms treatedwith niclosamide, or for decontaminating the bowel, as with colistin. Some drugs that are not absorbed easily, suchas bacitracin, polymyxin, and several antifungals, are available as topical preparations for treatment of superficialskin infections. Sometimes, patients may not initially be able to take oral medications because of their illness (e.g.,vomiting, intubation for respirator). When this occurs, and when a chosen drug is not absorbed in the GI tract,administration of the drug by a parenteral route (intravenous or intramuscular injection) is preferred and typicallyis performed in health-care settings. For most drugs, the plasma levels achieved by intravenous administration issubstantially higher than levels achieved by oral or intramuscular administration, and this can also be an importantconsideration when choosing the route of administration for treating an infection (Figure 14.7).7. M.E. Falagas, D.E. Karageorgopoulos. “Adjustment of Dosing of Antimicrobial Agents for Bodyweight in Adults.” The Lancet 375 no.9710 (2010):248–251.614 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 14.7 On this graph, t0 represents the time at which a drug dose is administered. The curves illustrate howplasma concentration of the drug changes over specific intervals of time (t1 through t4). As the graph shows, when adrug is administered intravenously, the concentration peaks very quickly and then gradually decreases. When drugsare administered orally or intramuscularly, it takes longer for the concentration to reach its peak.• List five factors to consider when determining the dosage of a drug.• Name some typical side effects associated with drugs and identify some factors that might contribute to theseside effects.Drug InteractionsFor the optimum treatment of some infections, two antibacterial drugs may be administered together to providea synergistic interaction that is better than the efficacy of either drug alone. A classic example of synergisticcombinations is trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim). Individually, these two drugs provide onlybacteriostatic inhibition of bacterial growth, but combined, the drugs are bactericidal.Whereas synergistic drug interactions provide a benefit to the patient, antagonistic interactions produce harmfuleffects. Antagonism can occur between two antimicrobials or between antimicrobials and nonantimicrobials beingused to treat other conditions. The effects vary depending on the drugs involved, but antagonistic interactions maycause loss of drug activity, decreased therapeutic levels due to increased metabolism and elimination, or increasedpotential for toxicity due to decreased metabolism and elimination. As an example, some antibacterials are absorbedmost effectively from the acidic environment of the stomach. If a patient takes antacids, however, this increases thepH of the stomach and negatively impacts the absorption of these antimicrobials, decreasing their effectiveness intreating an infection. Studies have also shown an association between use of some antimicrobials and failure of oralcontraceptives.[8]8. B.D. Dickinson et al. “Drug Interactions between Oral Contraceptives and Antibiotics.” Obstetrics & Gynecology 98, no. 5(2001):853–860.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 615• Explain the difference between synergistic and antagonistic drug interactions.Resistance PoliceIn the United States and many other countries, most antimicrobial drugs are self-administered by patients athome. Unfortunately, many patients stop taking antimicrobials once their symptoms dissipate and they feelbetter. If a 10-day course of treatment is prescribed, many patients only take the drug for 5 or 6 days, unawareof the negative consequences of not completing the full course of treatment. A shorter course of treatment notonly fails to kill the target organisms to expected levels, it also selects for drug-resistant variants within thetarget population and within the patient’s microbiota.Patients’ nonadherence especially amplifies drug resistance when the recommended course of treatment islong. Treatment for tuberculosis (TB) is a case in point, with the recommended treatment lasting from 6 monthsto a year. The CDC estimates that about one-third of the world’s population is infected with TB, most livingin underdeveloped or underserved regions where antimicrobial drugs are available over the counter. In suchcountries, there may be even lower rates of adherence than in developed areas. Nonadherence leads toantibiotic resistance and more difficulty in controlling pathogens. As a direct result, the emergence of multidrugresistantand extensively drug-resistant strains of TB is becoming a huge problem.Overprescription of antimicrobials also contributes to antibiotic resistance. Patients often demand antibiotics fordiseases that do not require them, like viral colds and ear infections. Pharmaceutical companies aggressivelymarket drugs to physicians and clinics, making it easy for them to give free samples to patients, and somepharmacies even offer certain antibiotics free to low-income patients with a prescription.In recent years, various initiatives have aimed to educate parents and clinicians about the judicious useof antibiotics. However, a recent study showed that, between 2000 and 2013, the parental expectation forantimicrobial prescriptions for children actually increased (Figure 14.8).One possible solution is a regimen called directly observed therapy (DOT), which involves the supervisedadministration of medications to patients. Patients are either required to visit a health-care facility to receivetheir medications, or health-care providers must administer medication in patients’ homes or anotherdesignated location. DOT has been implemented in many cases for the treatment of TB and has been shownto be effective; indeed, DOT is an integral part of WHO’s global strategy for eradicating TB.[9],[10] But isthis a practical strategy for all antibiotics? Would patients taking penicillin, for example, be more or lesslikely to adhere to the full course of treatment if they had to travel to a health-care facility for each dose?And who would pay for the increased cost associated with DOT? When it comes to overprescription, shouldsomeone be policing physicians or drug companies to enforce best practices? What group should assume thisresponsibility, and what penalties would be effective in discouraging overprescription?Eye on Ethics9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tuberculosis (TB).” http://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/ssmodules/module9/ss9reading2.htm.Accessed June 2, 2016.10. World Health Organization. “Tuberculosis (TB): The Five Elements of DOTS.” http://www.who.int/tb/dots/whatisdots/en/. AccessedJune 2, 2016.616 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 14.8 This graph indicates trends in parental expectations related to prescription of antibiotics basedon a recent study.[11] Among parents of Medicaid-insured children, there was a clear upward trend in parentalexpectations for prescription antibiotics. Expectations were relatively stable (and lesser) among parentswhose children were commercially insured, suggesting that these parents were somewhat better informedthan those with Medicaid-insured children.14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial DrugsLearning Objective• Describe the mechanisms of action associated with drugs that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis, protein synthesis,membrane function, nucleic acid synthesis, and metabolic pathwaysAn important quality for an antimicrobial drug is selective toxicity, meaning that it selectively kills or inhibits thegrowth of microbial targets while causing minimal or no harm to the host. Most antimicrobial drugs currently inclinical use are antibacterial because the prokaryotic cell provides a greater variety of unique targets for selectivetoxicity, in comparison to fungi, parasites, and viruses. Each class of antibacterial drugs has a unique mode of action(the way in which a drug affects microbes at the cellular level), and these are summarized in Figure 14.9 and Table14.1.11. Vaz, L.E., et al. “Prevalence of Parental Misconceptions About Antibiotic Use.” Pediatrics 136 no.2 (August 2015). DOI: 10.1542/peds.2015-0883.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 617Figure 14.9 There are several classes of antibacterial compounds that are typically classified based on theirbacterial target.Common Antibacterial Drugs by Mode of ActionMode of Action Target Drug ClassPenicillin-binding proteins β-lactams: penicillins, cephalosporins,monobactams, carbapenemsPeptidoglycan subunits GlycopeptidesInhibit cell wall biosynthesisPeptidoglycan subunittransportBacitracinInhibit biosynthesis of proteins 30S ribosomal subunit Aminoglycosides, tetracyclines50S ribosomal subunit Macrolides, lincosamides,chloramphenicol, oxazolidinonesDisrupt membranes Lipopolysaccharide, innerand outer membranesPolymyxin B, colistin, daptomycinRNA RifamycinInhibit nucleic acid synthesisDNA FluoroquinolonesFolic acid synthesis enzyme Sulfonamides, trimethoprimAntimetabolites Mycolic acid synthesisenzymeIsonicotinic acid hydrazideMycobacterial adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) synthase inhibitorMycobacterial ATPsynthaseDiarylquinolineTable 14.1618 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Inhibitors of Cell Wall BiosynthesisSeveral different classes of antibacterials block steps in the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan, making cells moresusceptible to osmotic lysis (Table 14.2). Therefore, antibacterials that target cell wall biosynthesis are bactericidalin their action. Because human cells do not make peptidoglycan, this mode of action is an excellent example ofselective toxicity.Penicillin, the first antibiotic discovered, is one of several antibacterials within a class called β-lactams. This groupof compounds includes the penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, and carbapenems, and is characterized bythe presence of a β-lactam ring found within the central structure of the drug molecule (Figure 14.10). The β-lactam antibacterials block the crosslinking of peptide chains during the biosynthesis of new peptidoglycan in thebacterial cell wall. They are able to block this process because the β-lactam structure is similar to the structure ofthe peptidoglycan subunit component that is recognized by the crosslinking transpeptidase enzyme, also known as apenicillin-binding protein (PBP). Although the β-lactam ring must remain unchanged for these drugs to retain theirantibacterial activity, strategic chemical changes to the R groups have allowed for development of a wide variety ofsemisynthetic β-lactam drugs with increased potency, expanded spectrum of activity, and longer half-lives for betterdosing, among other characteristics.Penicillin G and penicillin V are natural antibiotics from fungi and are primarily active against gram-positive bacterialpathogens, and a few gram-negative bacterial pathogens such as Pasteurella multocida. Figure 14.10 summarizesthe semisynthetic development of some of the penicillins. Adding an amino group (-NH2) to penicillin G createdthe aminopenicillins (i.e., ampicillin and amoxicillin) that have increased spectrum of activity against more gramnegativepathogens. Furthermore, the addition of a hydroxyl group (-OH) to amoxicillin increased acid stability,which allows for improved oral absorption. Methicillin is a semisynthetic penicillin that was developed to address thespread of enzymes (penicillinases) that were inactivating the other penicillins. Changing the R group of penicillin Gto the more bulky dimethoxyphenyl group provided protection of the β-lactam ring from enzymatic destruction bypenicillinases, giving us the first penicillinase-resistant penicillin.Similar to the penicillins, cephalosporins contain a β-lactam ring (Figure 14.10) and block the transpeptidaseactivity of penicillin-binding proteins. However, the β-lactam ring of cephalosporins is fused to a six-member ring,rather than the five-member ring found in penicillins. This chemical difference provides cephalosporins with anincreased resistance to enzymatic inactivation by β-lactamases. The drug cephalosporin C was originally isolatedfrom the fungus Cephalosporium acremonium in the 1950s and has a similar spectrum of activity to that of penicillinagainst gram-positive bacteria but is active against more gram-negative bacteria than penicillin. Another importantstructural difference is that cephalosporin C possesses two R groups, compared with just one R group for penicillin,and this provides for greater diversity in chemical alterations and development of semisynthetic cephalosporins. Thefamily of semisynthetic cephalosporins is much larger than the penicillins, and these drugs have been classifiedinto generations based primarily on their spectrum of activity, increasing in spectrum from the narrow-spectrum,first-generation cephalosporins to the broad-spectrum, fourth-generation cephalosporins. A new fifth-generationcephalosporin has been developed that is active against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).The carbapenems and monobactams also have a β-lactam ring as part of their core structure, and they inhibit thetranspeptidase activity of penicillin-binding proteins. The only monobactam used clinically is aztreonam. It is anarrow-spectrum antibacterial with activity only against gram-negative bacteria. In contrast, the carbapenem familyincludes a variety of semisynthetic drugs (imipenem, meropenem, and doripenem) that provide very broad-spectrumactivity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial pathogens.The drug vancomycin, a member of a class of compounds called the glycopeptides, was discovered in the 1950sas a natural antibiotic from the actinomycete Amycolatopsis orientalis. Similar to the β-lactams, vancomycin inhibitscell wall biosynthesis and is bactericidal. However, in contrast to the β-lactams, the structure of vancomycin isnot similar to that of cell-wall peptidoglycan subunits and does not directly inactivate penicillin-binding proteins.Rather, vancomycin is a very large, complex molecule that binds to the end of the peptide chain of cell wallprecursors, creating a structural blockage that prevents the cell wall subunits from being incorporated into thegrowing N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM-NAG) backbone of the peptidoglycan structure(transglycosylation). Vancomycin also structurally blocks transpeptidation. Vancomycin is bactericidal against gram-Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 619positive bacterial pathogens, but it is not active against gram-negative bacteria because of its inability to penetrate theprotective outer membrane.The drug bacitracin consists of a group of structurally similar peptide antibiotics originally isolated from Bacillussubtilis. Bacitracin blocks the activity of a specific cell-membrane molecule that is responsible for the movement ofpeptidoglycan precursors from the cytoplasm to the exterior of the cell, ultimately preventing their incorporation intothe cell wall. Bacitracin is effective against a wide range of bacteria, including gram-positive organisms found onthe skin, such as Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Although it may be administered orally or intramuscularly insome circumstances, bacitracin has been shown to be nephrotoxic (damaging to the kidneys). Therefore, it is morecommonly combined with neomycin and polymyxin in topical ointments such as Neosporin.Figure 14.10 Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, and carbapenems all contain a β-lactam ring, the site ofattack by inactivating β-lactamase enzymes. Although they all share the same nucleus, various penicillins differ fromeach other in the structure of their R groups. Chemical changes to the R groups provided increased spectrum ofactivity, acid stability, and resistance to β-lactamase degradation.Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall SynthesisMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsNatural orSemisyntheticSpectrum of ActivityInteract directly withPBPs and inhibittranspeptidase activityPenicillins Penicillin G,penicillin VNatural Narrow-spectrum againstgram-positive and a fewgram-negative bacteriaTable 14.2620 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall SynthesisMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsNatural orSemisyntheticSpectrum of ActivityAmpicillin,amoxicillinSemisynthetic Narrow-spectrum againstgram-positive bacteria butwith increased gramnegativespectrumMethicillin Semisynthetic Narrow-spectrum againstgram-positive bacteriaonly, including strainsproducing penicillinaseCephalosporinCNatural Narrow-spectrum similarto penicillin but withincreased gram-negativespectrumFirstgenerationcephalosporinsSemisynthetic Narrow-spectrum similarto cephalosporin CSecondgenerationcephalosporinsSemisynthetic Narrow-spectrum but withincreased gram-negativespectrum compared withfirst generationThird- andfourthgenerationcephalosporinsSemisynthetic Broad-spectrum againstgram-positive and gramnegativebacteria,including some β-lactamase producersCephalosporinsFifthgenerationcephalosporinsSemisynthetic Broad-spectrum againstgram-positive and gramnegativebacteria,including MRSAMonobactams Aztreonam Semisynthetic Narrow-spectrum againstgram-negative bacteria,including some β-lactamase producersCarbapenems Imipenem,meropenem,doripenemSemisynthetic Broadest spectrum of theβ-lactams against grampositiveand gramnegativebacteria,including many β-lactamase producersLarge molecules thatbind to the peptide chainof peptidoglycansubunits, blockingtransglycosylation andtranspeptidationGlycopeptides Vancomycin Natural Narrow spectrum againstgram-positive bacteriaonly, including multidrugresistantstrainsTable 14.2Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 621Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall SynthesisMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsNatural orSemisyntheticSpectrum of ActivityBlock transport ofpeptidoglycan subunitsacross cytoplasmicmembraneBacitracin Bacitracin Natural Broad-spectrum againstgram-positive and gramnegativebacteriaTable 14.2• Describe the mode of action of β-lactams.Inhibitors of Protein BiosynthesisThe cytoplasmic ribosomes found in animal cells (80S) are structurally distinct from those found in bacterialcells (70S), making protein biosynthesis a good selective target for antibacterial drugs. Several types of proteinbiosynthesis inhibitors are discussed in this section and are summarized in Figure 14.11.Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 30S SubunitAminoglycosides are large, highly polar antibacterial drugs that bind to the 30S subunit of bacterial ribosomes,impairing the proofreading ability of the ribosomal complex. This impairment causes mismatches between codonsand anticodons, resulting in the production of proteins with incorrect amino acids and shortened proteins that insertinto the cytoplasmic membrane. Disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by the faulty proteins kills the bacterialcells. The aminoglycosides, which include drugs such as streptomycin, gentamicin, neomycin, and kanamycin, arepotent broad-spectrum antibacterials. However, aminoglycosides have been shown to be nephrotoxic (damaging tokidney), neurotoxic (damaging to the nervous system), and ototoxic (damaging to the ear).Another class of antibacterial compounds that bind to the 30S subunit is the tetracyclines. In contrast toaminoglycosides, these drugs are bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis by blocking the association of tRNAswith the ribosome during translation. Naturally occurring tetracyclines produced by various strains of Streptomyceswere first discovered in the 1940s, and several semisynthetic tetracyclines, including doxycycline and tigecyclinehave also been produced. Although the tetracyclines are broad spectrum in their coverage of bacterial pathogens, sideeffects that can limit their use include phototoxicity, permanent discoloration of developing teeth, and liver toxicitywith high doses or in patients with kidney impairment.Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 50S SubunitThere are several classes of antibacterial drugs that work through binding to the 50S subunit of bacterial ribosomes.The macrolide antibacterial drugs have a large, complex ring structure and are part of a larger class of naturallyproduced secondary metabolites called polyketides, complex compounds produced in a stepwise fashion throughthe repeated addition of two-carbon units by a mechanism similar to that used for fatty acid synthesis. Macrolidesare broad-spectrum, bacteriostatic drugs that block elongation of proteins by inhibiting peptide bond formationbetween specific combinations of amino acids. The first macrolide was erythromycin. It was isolated in 1952 fromStreptomyces erythreus and prevents translocation. Semisynthetic macrolides include azithromycin and telithromycin.Compared with erythromycin, azithromycin has a broader spectrum of activity, fewer side effects, and a significantlylonger half-life (1.5 hours for erythromycin versus 68 hours for azithromycin) that allows for once-daily dosing anda short 3-day course of therapy (i.e., Zpac formulation) for most infections. Telithromycin is the first semisynthetic622 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5within the class known as ketolides. Although telithromycin shows increased potency and activity against macrolideresistantpathogens, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has limited its use to treatment of communityacquiredpneumonia and requires the strongest “black box warning” label for the drug because of serioushepatotoxicity.The lincosamides include the naturally produced lincomycin and semisynthetic clindamycin. Although structurallydistinct from macrolides, lincosamides are similar in their mode of action to the macrolides through binding to the 50Sribosomal subunit and preventing peptide bond formation. Lincosamides are particularly active against streptococcaland staphylococcal infections.The drug chloramphenicol represents yet another structurally distinct class of antibacterials that also bind tothe 50S ribosome, inhibiting peptide bond formation. Chloramphenicol, produced by Streptomyces venezuelae,was discovered in 1947; in 1949, it became the first broad-spectrum antibiotic that was approved by the FDA.Although it is a natural antibiotic, it is also easily synthesized and was the first antibacterial drug syntheticallymass produced. As a result of its mass production, broad-spectrum coverage, and ability to penetrate into tissuesefficiently, chloramphenicol was historically used to treat a wide range of infections, from meningitis to typhoidfever to conjunctivitis. Unfortunately, serious side effects, such as lethal gray baby syndrome, and suppressionof bone marrow production, have limited its clinical role. Chloramphenicol also causes anemia in two differentways. One mechanism involves the targeting of mitochondrial ribosomes within hematopoietic stem cells, causing areversible, dose-dependent suppression of blood cell production. Once chloramphenicol dosing is discontinued, bloodcell production returns to normal. This mechanism highlights the similarity between 70S ribosomes of bacteria andthe 70S ribosomes within our mitochondria. The second mechanism of anemia is idiosyncratic (i.e., the mechanismis not understood), and involves an irreversible lethal loss of blood cell production known as aplastic anemia. Thismechanism of aplastic anemia is not dose dependent and can develop after therapy has stopped. Because of toxicityconcerns, chloramphenicol usage in humans is now rare in the United States and is limited to severe infections unableto be treated by less toxic antibiotics. Because its side effects are much less severe in animals, it is used in veterinarymedicine.The oxazolidinones, including linezolid, are a new broad-spectrum class of synthetic protein synthesis inhibitorsthat bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. However, their mechanismof action seems somewhat different from that of the other 50S subunit-binding protein synthesis inhibitors alreadydiscussed. Instead, they seem to interfere with formation of the initiation complex (association of the 50S subunit, 30Ssubunit, and other factors) for translation, and they prevent translocation of the growing protein from the ribosomalA site to the P site. Table 14.3 summarizes the protein synthesis inhibitors.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 623Figure 14.11 The major classes of protein synthesis inhibitors target the 30S or 50S subunits of cytoplasmicribosomes.Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Protein SynthesisMolecularTargetMechanism of Action Drug Class Specific Drugs BacteriostaticorBactericidalSpectrumofActivityCauses mismatchesbetween codons andanticodons, leading tofaulty proteins thatinsert into and disruptcytoplasmic membraneAminoglycosides Streptomycin,gentamicin,neomycin,kanamycinBactericidal Broadspectrum30SsubunitBlocks association oftRNAs with ribosomeTetracyclines Tetracycline,doxycycline,tigecyclineBacteriostatic BroadspectrumMacrolides Erythromycin,azithromycin,telithromycinBacteriostatic BroadspectrumLincosamides Lincomycin,clindamycinBacteriostatic NarrowspectrumBlocks peptide bondformation betweenamino acidsNot applicable Chloramphenicol Bacteriostatic Broadspectrum50SsubunitInterferes with theformation of theinitiation complexbetween 50S and 30Ssubunits and otherfactors.Oxazolidinones Linezolid Bacteriostatic BroadspectrumTable 14.3624 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Compare and contrast the different types of protein synthesis inhibitors.Inhibitors of Membrane FunctionA small group of antibacterials target the bacterial membrane as their mode of action (Table 14.4). The polymyxinsare natural polypeptide antibiotics that were first discovered in 1947 as products of Bacillus polymyxa; onlypolymyxin B and polymyxin E (colistin) have been used clinically. They are lipophilic with detergent-like propertiesand interact with the lipopolysaccharide component of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, ultimatelydisrupting both their outer and inner membranes and killing the bacterial cells. Unfortunately, the membrane-targetingmechanism is not a selective toxicity, and these drugs also target and damage the membrane of cells in the kidney andnervous system when administered systemically. Because of these serious side effects and their poor absorption fromthe digestive tract, polymyxin B is used in over-the-counter topical antibiotic ointments (e.g., Neosporin), and oralcolistin was historically used only for bowel decontamination to prevent infections originating from bowel microbesin immunocompromised patients or for those undergoing certain abdominal surgeries. However, the emergence andspread of multidrug-resistant pathogens has led to increased use of intravenous colistin in hospitals, often as a drug oflast resort to treat serious infections. The antibacterial daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide produced by Streptomycesroseosporus that seems to work like the polymyxins, inserting in the bacterial cell membrane and disrupting it.However, in contrast to polymyxin B and colistin, which target only gram-negative bacteria, daptomycin specificallytargets gram-positive bacteria. It is typically administered intravenously and seems to be well tolerated, showingreversible toxicity in skeletal muscles.Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Membrane FunctionMechanism of Action DrugClassSpecificDrugsSpectrum ofActivityClinical UsePolymyxinBNarrowspectrumagainst gramnegativebacteria,includingmultidrugresistantstrainsTopical preparations toprevent infections inwoundsOral dosing todecontaminate bowels toprevent infections inimmunocompromisedpatients or patientsundergoing invasivesurgery/procedures.Interacts with lipopolysaccharidein the outer membrane of gramnegativebacteria, killing the cellthrough the eventual disruption ofthe outer membrane andcytoplasmic membranePolymyxinsPolymyxinE (colistin)Narrowspectrumagainst gramnegativebacteria,includingmultidrugresistantstrains Intravenous dosing totreat serious systemicinfections caused bymultidrug-resistantpathogensTable 14.4Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 625Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Membrane FunctionMechanism of Action DrugClassSpecificDrugsSpectrum ofActivityClinical UseInserts into the cytoplasmicmembrane of gram-positivebacteria, disrupting themembrane and killing the cellLipopeptide Daptomycin Narrowspectrumagainst grampositivebacteria,includingmultidrugresistantstrainsComplicated skin andskin-structure infectionsand bacteremia causedby gram-positivepathogens, includingMRSATable 14.4• How do polymyxins inhibit membrane function?Inhibitors of Nucleic Acid SynthesisSome antibacterial drugs work by inhibiting nucleic acid synthesis (Table 14.5). For example, metronidazole is asemisynthetic member of the nitroimidazole family that is also an antiprotozoan. It interferes with DNA replicationin target cells. The drug rifampin is a semisynthetic member of the rifamycin family and functions by blockingRNA polymerase activity in bacteria. The RNA polymerase enzymes in bacteria are structurally different from thosein eukaryotes, providing for selective toxicity against bacterial cells. It is used for the treatment of a variety ofinfections, but its primary use, often in a cocktail with other antibacterial drugs, is against mycobacteria that causetuberculosis. Despite the selectivity of its mechanism, rifampin can induce liver enzymes to increase metabolism ofother drugs being administered (antagonism), leading to hepatotoxicity (liver toxicity) and negatively influencing thebioavailability and therapeutic effect of the companion drugs.One member of the quinolone family, a group of synthetic antimicrobials, is nalidixic acid. It was discovered in1962 as a byproduct during the synthesis of chloroquine, an antimalarial drug. Nalidixic acid selectively inhibitsthe activity of bacterial DNA gyrase, blocking DNA replication. Chemical modifications to the original quinolonebackbone have resulted in the production of fluoroquinolones, like ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin, which also inhibitthe activity of DNA gyrase. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are effective against a broad spectrum of gram-positiveor gram-negative bacteria, and are among the most commonly prescribed antibiotics used to treat a wide rangeof infections, including urinary tract infections, respiratory infections, abdominal infections, and skin infections.However, despite their selective toxicity against DNA gyrase, side effects associated with different fluoroquinolonesinclude phototoxicity, neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, glucose metabolism dysfunction, and increased risk for tendonrupture.626 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Nucleic Acid SynthesisMechanisms ofActionDrug Class SpecificDrugsSpectrum of activity ClinicalUseInhibits bacterialRNA polymeraseactivity andblockstranscription,killing the cellRifamycin Rifampin Narrow spectrum with activityagainst gram-positive and limitednumbers of gram-negative bacteria.Also active against Mycobacteriumtuberculosis.Combinationtherapy fortreatment oftuberculosisInhibits theactivity of DNAgyrase andblocks DNAreplication, killingthe cellFluoroquinolones Ciprofloxacin,ofloxacin,moxifloxacinBroad spectrum against grampositiveand gram-negative bacteriaWide varietyof skin andsystemicinfectionsTable 14.5• Why do inhibitors of bacterial nucleic acid synthesis not target host cells?Inhibitors of Metabolic PathwaysSome synthetic drugs control bacterial infections by functioning as antimetabolites, competitive inhibitors forbacterial metabolic enzymes (Table 14.6). The sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) are the oldest synthetic antibacterialagents and are structural analogues of para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), an early intermediate in folic acid synthesis(Figure 14.12). By inhibiting the enzyme involved in the production of dihydrofolic acid, sulfonamides blockbacterial biosynthesis of folic acid and, subsequently, pyrimidines and purines required for nucleic acid synthesis.This mechanism of action provides bacteriostatic inhibition of growth against a wide spectrum of gram-positiveand gram-negative pathogens. Because humans obtain folic acid from food instead of synthesizing it intracellularly,sulfonamides are selectively toxic for bacteria. However, allergic reactions to sulfa drugs are common. The sulfonesare structurally similar to sulfonamides but are not commonly used today except for the treatment of Hansen’s disease(leprosy).Trimethoprim is a synthetic antimicrobial compound that serves as an antimetabolite within the same folic acidsynthesis pathway as sulfonamides. However, trimethoprim is a structural analogue of dihydrofolic acid and inhibitsa later step in the metabolic pathway (Figure 14.12). Trimethoprim is used in combination with the sulfa drugsulfamethoxazole to treat urinary tract infections, ear infections, and bronchitis. As discussed, the combination oftrimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is an example of antibacterial synergy. When used alone, each antimetabolite onlydecreases production of folic acid to a level where bacteriostatic inhibition of growth occurs. However, when used incombination, inhibition of both steps in the metabolic pathway decreases folic acid synthesis to a level that is lethalto the bacterial cell. Because of the importance of folic acid during fetal development, sulfa drugs and trimethoprimuse should be carefully considered during early pregnancy.The drug isoniazid is an antimetabolite with specific toxicity for mycobacteria and has long been used in combinationwith rifampin or streptomycin in the treatment of tuberculosis. It is administered as a prodrug, requiring activationthrough the action of an intracellular bacterial peroxidase enzyme, forming isoniazid-nicotinamide adeninedinucleotide (NAD) and isoniazid-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), ultimately preventing thesynthesis of mycolic acid, which is essential for mycobacterial cell walls. Possible side effects of isoniazid use includehepatotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and hematologic toxicity (anemia).Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 627Figure 14.12 Sulfonamides and trimethoprim are examples of antimetabolites that interfere in the bacterial synthesisof folic acid by blocking purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, thus inhibiting bacterial growth.Antimetabolite DrugsMetabolicPathwayTargetMechanism of Action Drug Class Specific Drugs Spectrum of ActivityInhibits the enzyme Sulfonamides Sulfamethoxazoleinvolved in production ofdihydrofolic acid Sulfones DapsoneBroad spectrum againstgram-positive and gramnegativebacteriaFolic acidsynthesisInhibits the enzymeinvolved in the productionof tetrahydrofolic acidNotapplicableTrimethoprim Broad spectrum againstgram-positive and gramnegativebacteriaTable 14.6628 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Antimetabolite DrugsMetabolicPathwayTargetMechanism of Action Drug Class Specific Drugs Spectrum of ActivityMycolicacidsynthesisInterferes with thesynthesis of mycolic acidNotapplicableIsoniazid Narrow spectrum againstMycobacterium spp.,including M. tuberculosisTable 14.6• How do sulfonamides and trimethoprim selectively target bacteria?Inhibitor of ATP SynthaseBedaquiline, representing the synthetic antibacterial class of compounds called the diarylquinolines, uses a novelmode of action that specifically inhibits mycobacterial growth. Although the specific mechanism has yet to beelucidated, this compound appears to interfere with the function of ATP synthases, perhaps by interfering with theuse of the hydrogen ion gradient for ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation, leading to reduced ATP production.Due to its side effects, including hepatotoxicity and potentially lethal heart arrhythmia, its use is reserved for serious,otherwise untreatable cases of tuberculosis.To learn more about the general principles of antimicrobial therapy and bacterialmodes of action, visit Michigan State University’s Antimicrobial ResistanceLearning Site (https://openstax.org/l/22MSUantireslea) , particularly pages 6through 9.Part 2Reading thorough Marisa’s health history, the doctor noticed that during her hospitalization in Vietnam, shewas catheterized and received the antimicrobial drugs ceftazidime and metronidazole. Upon learning this, thedoctor ordered a CT scan of Marisa’s abdomen to rule out appendicitis; the doctor also requested blood workto see if she had an elevated white blood cell count, and ordered a urine analysis test and urine culture to lookfor the presence of white blood cells, red blood cells, and bacteria.Marisa’s urine sample came back positive for the presence of bacteria, indicating a urinary tract infection (UTI).The doctor prescribed ciprofloxacin. In the meantime, her urine was cultured to grow the bacterium for furthertesting.• What types of antimicrobials are typically prescribed for UTIs?• Based upon the antimicrobial drugs she was given in Vietnam, which of the antimicrobials for treatmentLink to LearningClinical FocusChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 629of a UTI would you predict to be ineffective?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial DrugsLearning Objective• Explain the differences between modes of action of drugs that target fungi, protozoa, helminths, and virusesBecause fungi, protozoa, and helminths are eukaryotic, their cells are very similar to human cells, making it moredifficult to develop drugs with selective toxicity. Additionally, viruses replicate within human host cells, making itdifficult to develop drugs that are selectively toxic to viruses or virus-infected cells. Despite these challenges, thereare antimicrobial drugs that target fungi, protozoa, helminths, and viruses, and some even target more than one typeof microbe. Table 14.7, Table 14.8, Table 14.9, and Table 14.10 provide examples for antimicrobial drugs inthese various classes.Antifungal DrugsThe most common mode of action for antifungal drugs is the disruption of the cell membrane. Antifungals takeadvantage of small differences between fungi and humans in the biochemical pathways that synthesize sterols. Thesterols are important in maintaining proper membrane fluidity and, hence, proper function of the cell membrane. Formost fungi, the predominant membrane sterol is ergosterol. Because human cell membranes use cholesterol, insteadof ergosterol, antifungal drugs that target ergosterol synthesis are selectively toxic (Figure 14.13).Figure 14.13 The predominant sterol found in human cells is cholesterol, whereas the predominant sterol found infungi is ergosterol, making ergosterol a good target for antifungal drug development.The imidazoles are synthetic fungicides that disrupt ergosterol biosynthesis; they are commonly used in medicalapplications and also in agriculture to keep seeds and harvested crops from molding. Examples include miconazole,ketoconazole, and clotrimazole, which are used to treat fungal skin infections such as ringworm, specificallytinea pedis (athlete’s foot), tinea cruris (jock itch), and tinea corporis. These infections are commonly causedby dermatophytes of the genera Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Miconazole is also usedpredominantly for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections caused by the fungus Candida, and ketoconazole is usedfor the treatment of tinea versicolor and dandruff, which both can be caused by the fungus Malassezia.The triazole drugs, including fluconazole, also inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis. However, they can be administeredorally or intravenously for the treatment of several types of systemic yeast infections, including oral thrush andcryptococcal meningitis, both of which are prevalent in patients with AIDS. The triazoles also exhibit more selective630 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5toxicity, compared with the imidazoles, and are associated with fewer side effects.The allylamines, a structurally different class of synthetic antifungal drugs, inhibit an earlier step in ergosterolbiosynthesis. The most commonly used allylamine is terbinafine (marketed under the brand name Lamisil), whichis used topically for the treatment of dermatophytic skin infections like athlete’s foot, ringworm, and jock itch. Oraltreatment with terbinafine is also used for the treatment of fingernail and toenail fungus, but it can be associated withthe rare side effect of hepatotoxicity.The polyenes are a class of antifungal agents naturally produced by certain actinomycete soil bacteria and arestructurally related to macrolides. These large, lipophilic molecules bind to ergosterol in fungal cytoplasmicmembranes, thus creating pores. Common examples include nystatin and amphotericin B. Nystatin is typically usedas a topical treatment for yeast infections of the skin, mouth, and vagina, but may also be used for intestinalfungal infections. The drug amphotericin B is used for systemic fungal infections like aspergillosis, cryptococcalmeningitis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and candidiasis. Amphotericin B was the only antifungal drug availablefor several decades, but its use is associated with some serious side effects, including nephrotoxicity (kidney toxicity).Amphotericin B is often used in combination with flucytosine, a fluorinated pyrimidine analog that is converted by afungal-specific enzyme into a toxic product that interferes with both DNA replication and protein synthesis in fungi.Flucytosine is also associated with hepatotoxicity (liver toxicity) and bone marrow depression.Beyond targeting ergosterol in fungal cell membranes, there are a few antifungal drugs that target other fungalstructures (Figure 14.14). The echinocandins, including caspofungin, are a group of naturally produced antifungalcompounds that block the synthesis of β(1→3) glucan found in fungal cell walls but not found in human cells. Thisdrug class has the nickname “penicillin for fungi.” Caspofungin is used for the treatment of aspergillosis as well assystemic yeast infections.Although chitin is only a minor constituent of fungal cell walls, it is also absent in human cells, making it a selectivetarget. The polyoxins and nikkomycins are naturally produced antifungals that target chitin synthesis. Polyoxins areused to control fungi for agricultural purposes, and nikkomycin Z is currently under development for use in humansto treat yeast infections and Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis), a fungal disease prevalent in the southwestern US.[12]The naturally produced antifungal griseofulvin is thought to specifically disrupt fungal cell division by interferingwith microtubules involved in spindle formation during mitosis. It was one of the first antifungals, but its useis associated with hepatotoxicity. It is typically administered orally to treat various types of dermatophytic skininfections when other topical antifungal treatments are ineffective.There are a few drugs that act as antimetabolites against fungal processes. For example, atovaquone, a representativeof the naphthoquinone drug class, is a semisynthetic antimetabolite for fungal and protozoal versions of amitochondrial cytochrome important in electron transport. Structurally, it is an analog of coenzyme Q, with whichit competes for electron binding. It is particularly useful for the treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia caused byPneumocystis jirovecii. The antibacterial sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim combination also acts as an antimetaboliteagainst P. jirovecii.Table 14.7 shows the various therapeutic classes of antifungal drugs, categorized by mode of action, with examplesof each.12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Valley Fever: Awareness Is Key.” http://www.cdc.gov/features/valleyfever/. AccessedJune 1, 2016.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 631Figure 14.14 Antifungal drugs target several different cell structures. (credit right: modification of work by “Maya andRike”/Wikimedia Commons)Common Antifungal DrugsMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsClinical UsesImidazoles Miconazole,ketoconazole,clotrimazoleFungal skin infections and vaginal yeastinfectionsTriazoles Fluconazole Systemic yeast infections, oral thrush,and cryptococcal meningitisInhibit ergosterol synthesisAllylamines Terbinafine Dermatophytic skin infections (athlete’sfoot, ring worm, jock itch), and infectionsof fingernails and toenailsNystatin Used topically for yeast infections ofskin, mouth, and vagina; also used forfungal infections of the intestineBind ergosterol in the cellmembrane and create poresthat disrupt the membranePolyenesAmphotericin B Variety systemic fungal infectionsEchinocandins Caspofungin Aspergillosis and systemic yeastinfectionsInhibit cell wall synthesisNot applicable Nikkomycin Z Coccidioidomycosis (Valley fever) andyeast infectionsInhibit microtubules and celldivisionNot applicable Griseofulvin Dermatophytic skin infectionsTable 14.7632 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• How is disruption of ergosterol biosynthesis an effective mode of action for antifungals?Treating a Fungal Infection of the LungsJack, a 48-year-old engineer, is HIV positive but generally healthy thanks to antiretroviral therapy (ART).However, after a particularly intense week at work, he developed a fever and a dry cough. He assumedthat he just had a cold or mild flu due to overexertion and didn’t think much of it. However, after about aweek, he began to experience fatigue, weight loss, and shortness of breath. He decided to visit his physician,who found that Jack had a low level of blood oxygenation. The physician ordered blood testing, a chest Xray,and the collection of an induced sputum sample for analysis. His X-ray showed a fine cloudiness andseveral pneumatoceles (thin-walled pockets of air), which indicated Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), a typeof pneumonia caused by the fungus Pneumocystis jirovecii. Jack’s physician admitted him to the hospital andprescribed Bactrim, a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, to be administered intravenously.P. jirovecii is a yeast-like fungus with a life cycle similar to that of protozoans. As such, it was classifiedas a protozoan until the 1980s. It lives only in the lung tissue of infected persons and is transmitted fromperson to person, with many people exposed as children. Typically, P. jirovecii only causes pneumonia inimmunocompromised individuals. Healthy people may carry the fungus in their lungs with no symptoms ofdisease. PCP is particularly problematic among HIV patients with compromised immune systems.PCP is usually treated with oral or intravenous Bactrim, but atovaquone or pentamidine (another antiparasiticdrug) are alternatives. If not treated, PCP can progress, leading to a collapsed lung and nearly 100% mortality.Even with antimicrobial drug therapy, PCP still is responsible for 10% of HIV-related deaths.The cytological examination, using direct immunofluorescence assay (DFA), of a smear from Jack’s sputumsample confirmed the presence of P. jirovecii (Figure 14.15). Additionally, the results of Jack’s blood testsrevealed that his white blood cell count had dipped, making him more susceptible to the fungus. His physicianreviewed his ART regimen and made adjustments. After a few days of hospitalization, Jack was released tocontinue his antimicrobial therapy at home. With the adjustments to his ART therapy, Jack’s CD4 counts beganto increase and he was able to go back to work.Figure 14.15 Microscopic examination of an induced sputum sample or bronchoaveolar lavage sampletypically reveals the organism, as shown here. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Case in PointChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 633Antiprotozoan DrugsThere are a few mechanisms by which antiprotozoan drugs target infectious protozoans (Table 14.9). Some areantimetabolites, such as atovaquone, proguanil, and artemisinins. Atovaquone, in addition to being antifungal, blockselectron transport in protozoans and is used for the treatment of protozoan infections including malaria, babesiosis,and toxoplasmosis. Proguanil is another synthetic antimetabolite that is processed in parasitic cells into its activeform, which inhibits protozoan folic acid synthesis. It is often used in combination with atovaquone, and thecombination is marketed as Malarone for both malaria treatment and prevention.Artemisinin, a plant-derived antifungal first discovered by Chinese scientists in the 1970s, is quite effective againstmalaria. Semisynthetic derivatives of artemisinin are more water soluble than the natural version, which makesthem more bioavailable. Although the exact mechanism of action is unclear, artemisinins appear to act as prodrugsthat are metabolized by target cells to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) that damage target cells. Due to therise in resistance to antimalarial drugs, artemisinins are also commonly used in combination with other antimalarialcompounds in artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT).Several antimetabolites are used for the treatment of toxoplasmosis caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Thesynthetic sulfa drug sulfadiazine competitively inhibits an enzyme in folic acid production in parasites and can beused to treat malaria and toxoplasmosis. Pyrimethamine is a synthetic drug that inhibits a different enzyme in thefolic acid production pathway and is often used in combination with sulfadoxine (another sulfa drug) for the treatmentof malaria or in combination with sulfadiazine for the treatment of toxoplasmosis. Side effects of pyrimethamineinclude decreased bone marrow activity that may cause increased bruising and low red blood cell counts. Whentoxicity is a concern, spiramycin, a macrolide protein synthesis inhibitor, is typically administered for the treatmentof toxoplasmosis.Two classes of antiprotozoan drugs interfere with nucleic acid synthesis: nitroimidazoles and quinolines.Nitroimidazoles, including semisynthetic metronidazole, which was discussed previously as an antibacterial drug,and synthetic tinidazole, are useful in combating a wide variety of protozoan pathogens, such as Giardia lamblia,Entamoeba histolytica, and Trichomonas vaginalis. Upon introduction into these cells in low-oxygen environments,nitroimidazoles become activated and introduce DNA strand breakage, interfering with DNA replication in targetcells. Unfortunately, metronidazole is associated with carcinogenesis (the development of cancer) in humans.Another type of synthetic antiprotozoan drug that has long been thought to specifically interfere with DNA replicationin certain pathogens is pentamidine. It has historically been used for the treatment of African sleeping sickness(caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma brucei) and leishmaniasis (caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania), butit is also an alternative treatment for the fungus Pneumocystis. Some studies indicate that it specifically binds to theDNA found within kinetoplasts (kDNA; long mitochondrion-like structures unique to trypanosomes), leading to thecleavage of kDNA. However, nuclear DNA of both the parasite and host remain unaffected. It also appears to bindto tRNA, inhibiting the addition of amino acids to tRNA, thus preventing protein synthesis. Possible side effects ofpentamidine use include pancreatic dysfunction and liver damage.The quinolines are a class of synthetic compounds related to quinine, which has a long history of use against malaria.Quinolines are thought to interfere with heme detoxification, which is necessary for the parasite’s effective breakdownof hemoglobin into amino acids inside red blood cells. The synthetic derivatives chloroquine, quinacrine (also calledmepacrine), and mefloquine are commonly used as antimalarials, and chloroquine is also used to treat amebiasistypically caused by Entamoeba histolytica. Long-term prophylactic use of chloroquine or mefloquine may resultin serious side effects, including hallucinations or cardiac issues. Patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenasedeficiency experience severe anemia when treated with chloroquine.634 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Common Antiprotozoan DrugsMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsClinical UsesInhibit electrontransport inmitochondriaNaphthoquinone Atovaquone Malaria, babesiosis, and toxoplasmosisNot applicable Proquanil Combination therapy with atovaquone formalaria treatment and preventionSulfonamide Sulfadiazine Malaria and toxoplasmosisInhibit folic acidsynthesisNot applicable Pyrimethamine Combination therapy with sulfadoxine (sulfadrug) for malariaProduces damagingreactive oxygenspeciesNot applicable Artemisinin Combination therapy to treat malariaNitroimidazoles Metronidazole,tinidazoleInfections caused by Giardia lamblia,Entamoeba histolytica, and TrichomonasvaginalisInhibit DNA synthesisNot applicable Pentamidine African sleeping sickness and leishmaniasisInhibit heme Chloroquine Malaria and infections with E. histolyticadetoxificationQuinolinesMepacrine,mefloquineMalariaTable 14.8• List two modes of action for antiprotozoan drugs.Antihelminthic DrugsBecause helminths are multicellular eukaryotes like humans, developing drugs with selective toxicity against themis extremely challenging. Despite this, several effective classes have been developed (Table 14.9). Syntheticbenzimidazoles, like mebendazole and albendazole, bind to helminthic β-tubulin, preventing microtubuleformation. Microtubules in the intestinal cells of the worms seem to be particularly affected, leading to a reductionin glucose uptake. Besides their activity against a broad range of helminths, benzimidazoles are also active againstmany protozoans, fungi, and viruses, and their use for inhibiting mitosis and cell cycle progression in cancer cells isunder study.[13] Possible side effects of their use include liver damage and bone marrow suppression.The avermectins are members of the macrolide family that were first discovered from a Japanese soil isolate,Streptomyces avermectinius. A more potent semisynthetic derivative of avermectin is ivermectin, which binds toglutamate-gated chloride channels specific to invertebrates including helminths, blocking neuronal transmission andcausing starvation, paralysis, and death of the worms. Ivermectin is used to treat roundworm diseases, includingonchocerciasis (also called river blindness, caused by the worm Onchocerca volvulus) and strongyloidiasis (causedby the worm Strongyloides stercoralis or S. fuelleborni). Ivermectin also can also treat parasitic insects like mites,13. B. Chu et al. “A Benzimidazole Derivative Exhibiting Antitumor Activity Blocks EGFR and HER2 Activity and Upregulates DR5 inBreast Cancer Cells.” Cell Death and Disease 6 (2015):e1686Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 635lice, and bed bugs, and is nontoxic to humans.Niclosamide is a synthetic drug that has been used for over 50 years to treat tapeworm infections. Although itsmode of action is not entirely clear, niclosamide appears to inhibit ATP formation under anaerobic conditions andinhibit oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of its target pathogens. Niclosamide is not absorbed from thegastrointestinal tract, thus it can achieve high localized intestinal concentrations in patients. Recently, it has beenshown to also have antibacterial, antiviral, and antitumor activities.[14][15][16]Another synthetic antihelminthic drug is praziquantel, which used for the treatment of parasitic tapeworms and liverflukes, and is particularly useful for the treatment of schistosomiasis (caused by blood flukes from three genera ofSchistosoma). Its mode of action remains unclear, but it appears to cause the influx of calcium into the worm, resultingin intense spasm and paralysis of the worm. It is often used as a preferred alternative to niclosamide in the treatmentof tapeworms when gastrointestinal discomfort limits niclosamide use.The thioxanthenones, another class of synthetic drugs structurally related to quinine, exhibit antischistosomal activityby inhibiting RNA synthesis. The thioxanthenone lucanthone and its metabolite hycanthone were the first usedclinically, but serious neurological, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and hepatic side effects led to theirdiscontinuation. Oxamniquine, a less toxic derivative of hycanthone, is only effective against S. mansoni, oneof the three species known to cause schistosomiasis in humans. Praziquantel was developed to target the othertwo schistosome species, but concerns about increasing resistance have renewed interest in developing additionalderivatives of oxamniquine to target all three clinically important schistosome species.Common Antihelminthic DrugsMechanism of Action Drug Class SpecificDrugsClinical UsesInhibit microtubuleformation, reducingglucose uptakeBenzimidazoles Mebendazole,albendazoleVariety of helminth infectionsBlock neuronaltransmission, causingparalysis and starvationAvermectins Ivermectin Roundworm diseases, including riverblindness and strongyloidiasis, andtreatment of parasitic insectsInhibit ATP production Not applicable Niclosamide Intestinal tapeworm infectionsInduce calcium influx Not applicable Praziquantel Schistosomiasis (blood flukes)Inhibit RNA synthesis Thioxanthenones Lucanthone,hycanthone,oxamniquineSchistosomiasis (blood flukes)Table 14.9• Why are antihelminthic drugs difficult to develop?14. J.-X. Pan et al. “Niclosamide, An Old Antihelminthic Agent, Demonstrates Antitumor Activity by Blocking Multiple SignalingPathways of Cancer Stem Cells.” Chinese Journal of Cancer 31 no. 4 (2012):178–184.15. F. Imperi et al. “New Life for an Old Drug: The Anthelmintic Drug Niclosamide Inhibits Pseudomonas aeruginosa Quorum Sensing.”Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 57 no. 2 (2013):996-1005.16. A. Jurgeit et al. “Niclosamide Is a Proton Carrier and Targets Acidic Endosomes with Broad Antiviral Effects.” PLoS Pathogens 8 no.10 (2012):e1002976.636 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Antiviral DrugsUnlike the complex structure of fungi, protozoa, and helminths, viral structure is simple, consisting of nucleicacid, a protein coat, viral enzymes, and, sometimes, a lipid envelope. Furthermore, viruses are obligate intracellularpathogens that use the host’s cellular machinery to replicate. These characteristics make it difficult to develop drugswith selective toxicity against viruses.Many antiviral drugs are nucleoside analogs and function by inhibiting nucleic acid biosynthesis. For example,acyclovir (marketed as Zovirax) is a synthetic analog of the nucleoside guanosine (Figure 14.16). It is activatedby the herpes simplex viral enzyme thymidine kinase and, when added to a growing DNA strand during replication,causes chain termination. Its specificity for virus-infected cells comes from both the need for a viral enzyme toactivate it and the increased affinity of the activated form for viral DNA polymerase compared to host cell DNApolymerase. Acyclovir and its derivatives are frequently used for the treatment of herpes virus infections, includinggenital herpes, chickenpox, shingles, Epstein-Barr virus infections, and cytomegalovirus infections. Acyclovir can beadministered either topically or systemically, depending on the infection. One possible side effect of its use includesnephrotoxicity. The drug adenine-arabinoside, marketed as vidarabine, is a synthetic analog to deoxyadenosine thathas a mechanism of action similar to that of acyclovir. It is also effective for the treatment of various human herpesviruses. However, because of possible side effects involving low white blood cell counts and neurotoxicity, treatmentwith acyclovir is now preferred.Ribavirin, another synthetic guanosine analog, works by a mechanism of action that is not entirely clear. It appearsto interfere with both DNA and RNA synthesis, perhaps by reducing intracellular pools of guanosine triphosphate(GTP). Ribavarin also appears to inhibit the RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus. It is primarily used for thetreatment of the RNA viruses like hepatitis C (in combination therapy with interferon) and respiratory syncytialvirus. Possible side effects of ribavirin use include anemia and developmental effects on unborn children in pregnantpatients. In recent years, another nucleotide analog, sofosbuvir (Solvaldi), has also been developed for the treatmentof hepatitis C. Sofosbuvir is a uridine analog that interferes with viral polymerase activity. It is commonlycoadministered with ribavirin, with and without interferon.Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis is not the only target of synthetic antivirals. Although the mode of action ofamantadine and its relative rimantadine are not entirely clear, these drugs appear to bind to a transmembrane proteinthat is involved in the escape of the influenza virus from endosomes. Blocking escape of the virus also prevents viralRNA release into host cells and subsequent viral replication. Increasing resistance has limited the use of amantadineand rimantadine in the treatment of influenza A. Use of amantadine can result in neurological side effects, but the sideeffects of rimantadine seem less severe. Interestingly, because of their effects on brain chemicals such as dopamineand NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate), amantadine and rimantadine are also used for the treatment of Parkinson’sdisease.Neuraminidase inhibitors, including olsetamivir (Tamiflu), zanamivir (Relenza), and peramivir (Rapivab),specifically target influenza viruses by blocking the activity of influenza virus neuraminidase, preventing the releaseof the virus from infected cells. These three antivirals can decrease flu symptoms and shorten the duration of illness,but they differ in their modes of administration: olsetamivir is administered orally, zanamivir is inhaled, and peramiviris administered intravenously. Resistance to these neuraminidase inhibitors still seems to be minimal.Pleconaril is a synthetic antiviral under development that showed promise for the treatment of picornaviruses.Use of pleconaril for the treatment of the common cold caused by rhinoviruses was not approved by the FDAin 2002 because of lack of proven effectiveness, lack of stability, and association with irregular menstruation. Itsfurther development for this purpose was halted in 2007. However, pleconaril is still being investigated for usein the treatment of life-threatening complications of enteroviruses, such as meningitis and sepsis. It is also beinginvestigated for use in the global eradication of a specific enterovirus, polio.[17] Pleconaril seems to work by bindingto the viral capsid and preventing the uncoating of viral particles inside host cells during viral infection.Viruses with complex life cycles, such as HIV, can be more difficult to treat. First, HIV targets CD4-positive whiteblood cells, which are necessary for a normal immune response to infection. Second, HIV is a retrovirus, meaning17. M.J. Abzug. “The Enteroviruses: Problems in Need of Treatments.” Journal of Infection 68 no. S1 (2014):108–14.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 637that it converts its RNA genome into a DNA copy that integrates into the host cell’s genome, thus hiding within hostcell DNA. Third, the HIV reverse transcriptase lacks proofreading activity and introduces mutations that allow forrapid development of antiviral drug resistance. To help prevent the emergence of resistance, a combination of specificsynthetic antiviral drugs is typically used in ART for HIV (Figure 14.17).The reverse transcriptase inhibitors block the early step of converting viral RNA genome into DNA, and caninclude competitive nucleoside analog inhibitors (e.g., azidothymidine/zidovudine, or AZT) and non-nucleosidenoncompetitive inhibitors (e.g., etravirine) that bind reverse transcriptase and cause an inactivating conformationalchange. Drugs called protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir) block the processing of viral proteins and prevent viralmaturation. Protease inhibitors are also being developed for the treatment of other viral types.[18] For example,simeprevir (Olysio) has been approved for the treatment of hepatitis C and is administered with ribavirin andinterferon in combination therapy. The integrase inhibitors (e.g., raltegravir), block the activity of the HIV integraseresponsible for the recombination of a DNA copy of the viral genome into the host cell chromosome. Additional drugclasses for HIV treatment include the CCR5 antagonists and the fusion inhibitors (e.g., enfuviritide), which preventthe binding of HIV to the host cell coreceptor (chemokine receptor type 5 [CCR5]) and the merging of the viralenvelope with the host cell membrane, respectively. Table 14.10 shows the various therapeutic classes of antiviraldrugs, categorized by mode of action, with examples of each.18. B.L. Pearlman. “Protease Inhibitors for the Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis C Genotype-1 Infection: The New Standard of Care.” LancetInfectious Diseases 12 no. 9 (2012):717–728.638 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 14.16 Acyclovir is a structural analog of guanosine. It is specifically activated by the viral enzyme thymidinekinase and then preferentially binds to viral DNA polymerase, leading to chain termination during DNA replication.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 639Figure 14.17 Antiretroviral therapy (ART) is typically used for the treatment of HIV. The targets of drug classescurrently in use are shown here. (credit: modification of work by Thomas Splettstoesser)Common Antiviral DrugsMechanism of Action Drug Clinical UsesAcyclovir Herpes virus infectionsAzidothymidine/zidovudine (AZT)HIV infectionsRibavirin Hepatitis C virus and respiratory syncytialvirus infectionsVidarabine Herpes virus infectionsNucleoside analog inhibition of nucleicacid synthesisSofosbuvir Hepatitis C virus infectionsNon-nucleoside noncompetitiveinhibitionEtravirine HIV infectionsInhibit escape of virus fromendosomesAmantadine,rimantadineInfections with influenza virusInhibit neuraminadase Olsetamivir, zanamivir,peramivirInfections with influenza virusTable 14.10640 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Common Antiviral DrugsMechanism of Action Drug Clinical UsesInhibit viral uncoating Pleconaril Serious enterovirus infectionsInhibition of protease Ritonavir HIV infectionsSimeprevir Hepatitis C virus infectionsInhibition of integrase Raltegravir HIV infectionsInhibition of membrane fusion Enfuviritide HIV infectionsTable 14.10• Why is HIV difficult to treat with antivirals?To learn more about the various classes of antiretroviral drugs used in the ARTof HIV infection, explore each of the drugs in the HIV drug classes provided byUS Department of Health and Human Services at this (https://openstax.org/l/22HIVUSDepthea) website.14.5 Drug ResistanceLearning Objectives• Explain the concept of drug resistance• Describe how microorganisms develop or acquire drug resistance• Describe the different mechanisms of antimicrobial drug resistanceAntimicrobial resistance is not a new phenomenon. In nature, microbes are constantly evolving in order to overcomethe antimicrobial compounds produced by other microorganisms. Human development of antimicrobial drugs andtheir widespread clinical use has simply provided another selective pressure that promotes further evolution. Severalimportant factors can accelerate the evolution of drug resistance. These include the overuse and misuse ofantimicrobials, inappropriate use of antimicrobials, subtherapeutic dosing, and patient noncompliance with therecommended course of treatment.Exposure of a pathogen to an antimicrobial compound can select for chromosomal mutations conferring resistance,which can be transferred vertically to subsequent microbial generations and eventually become predominant in amicrobial population that is repeatedly exposed to the antimicrobial. Alternatively, many genes responsible for drugresistance are found on plasmids or in transposons that can be transferred easily between microbes through horizontalgene transfer (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity). Transposons also have the abilityto move resistance genes between plasmids and chromosomes to further promote the spread of resistance.Link to LearningChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 641Mechanisms for Drug ResistanceThere are several common mechanisms for drug resistance, which are summarized in Figure 14.18. Thesemechanisms include enzymatic modification of the drug, modification of the antimicrobial target, and prevention ofdrug penetration or accumulation.Figure 14.18 There are multiple strategies that microbes use to develop resistance to antimicrobial drugs. (Notshown: target overproduction, target mimicry, and enzymatic bypass). (credit: modification of work by Gerard DWright)Drug Modification or InactivationResistance genes may code for enzymes that chemically modify an antimicrobial, thereby inactivating it, or destroyan antimicrobial through hydrolysis. Resistance to many types of antimicrobials occurs through this mechanism. Forexample, aminoglycoside resistance can occur through enzymatic transfer of chemical groups to the drug molecule,impairing the binding of the drug to its bacterial target. For β-lactams, bacterial resistance can involve the enzymatichydrolysis of the β-lactam bond within the β-lactam ring of the drug molecule. Once the β-lactam bond is broken,the drug loses its antibacterial activity. This mechanism of resistance is mediated by β-lactamases, which are themost common mechanism of β-lactam resistance. Inactivation of rifampin commonly occurs through glycosylation,phosphorylation, or adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation, and resistance to macrolides and lincosamides canalso occur due to enzymatic inactivation of the drug or modification.Prevention of Cellular Uptake or EffluxMicrobes may develop resistance mechanisms that involve inhibiting the accumulation of an antimicrobial drug,which then prevents the drug from reaching its cellular target. This strategy is common among gram-negative642 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5pathogens and can involve changes in outer membrane lipid composition, porin channel selectivity, and/or porinchannel concentrations. For example, a common mechanism of carbapenem resistance among Pseudomonasaeruginosa is to decrease the amount of its OprD porin, which is the primary portal of entry for carbapenems throughthe outer membrane of this pathogen. Additionally, many gram-positive and gram-negative pathogenic bacteriaproduce efflux pumps that actively transport an antimicrobial drug out of the cell and prevent the accumulation ofdrug to a level that would be antibacterial. For example, resistance to β-lactams, tetracyclines, and fluoroquinolonescommonly occurs through active efflux out of the cell, and it is rather common for a single efflux pump to have theability to translocate multiple types of antimicrobials.Target ModificationBecause antimicrobial drugs have very specific targets, structural changes to those targets can prevent drug binding,rendering the drug ineffective. Through spontaneous mutations in the genes encoding antibacterial drug targets,bacteria have an evolutionary advantage that allows them to develop resistance to drugs. This mechanism of resistancedevelopment is quite common. Genetic changes impacting the active site of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) caninhibit the binding of β-lactam drugs and provide resistance to multiple drugs within this class. This mechanism isvery common among strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, which alter their own PBPs through genetic mechanisms.In contrast, strains of Staphylococcus aureus develop resistance to methicillin (MRSA) through the acquisition ofa new low-affinity PBP, rather than structurally alter their existing PBPs. Not only does this new low-affinity PBPprovide resistance to methicillin but it provides resistance to virtually all β-lactam drugs, with the exception of thenewer fifth-generation cephalosporins designed specifically to kill MRSA. Other examples of this resistance strategyinclude alterations in• ribosome subunits, providing resistance to macrolides, tetracyclines, and aminoglycosides;• lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structure, providing resistance to polymyxins;• RNA polymerase, providing resistance to rifampin;• DNA gyrase, providing resistance to fluoroquinolones;• metabolic enzymes, providing resistance to sulfa drugs, sulfones, and trimethoprim; and• peptidoglycan subunit peptide chains, providing resistance to glycopeptides.Target Overproduction or Enzymatic BypassWhen an antimicrobial drug functions as an antimetabolite, targeting a specific enzyme to inhibit its activity, thereare additional ways that microbial resistance may occur. First, the microbe may overproduce the target enzyme suchthat there is a sufficient amount of antimicrobial-free enzyme to carry out the proper enzymatic reaction. Second,the bacterial cell may develop a bypass that circumvents the need for the functional target enzyme. Both of thesestrategies have been found as mechanisms of sulfonamide resistance. Vancomycin resistance among S. aureus hasbeen shown to involve the decreased cross-linkage of peptide chains in the bacterial cell wall, which provides anincrease in targets for vancomycin to bind to in the outer cell wall. Increased binding of vancomycin in the outer cellwall provides a blockage that prevents free drug molecules from penetrating to where they can block new cell wallsynthesis.Target MimicryA recently discovered mechanism of resistance called target mimicry involves the production of proteins that bindand sequester drugs, preventing the drugs from binding to their target. For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosisproduces a protein with regular pentapeptide repeats that appears to mimic the structure of DNA. This protein bindsfluoroquinolones, sequestering them and keeping them from binding to DNA, providing M. tuberculosis resistanceto fluoroquinolones. Proteins that mimic the A-site of the bacterial ribosome have been found to contribute toaminoglycoside resistance as well.[19]19. D.H. Fong, A.M. Berghuis. “Substrate Promiscuity of an Aminoglycoside Antibiotic Resistance Enzyme Via Target Mimicry.” EMBOChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 643• List several mechanisms for drug resistance.Multidrug-Resistant Microbes and Cross ResistanceFrom a clinical perspective, our greatest concerns are multidrug-resistant microbes (MDRs) and cross resistance.MDRs are colloquially known as “superbugs” and carry one or more resistance mechanism(s), making them resistantto multiple antimicrobials. In cross-resistance, a single resistance mechanism confers resistance to multipleantimicrobial drugs. For example, having an efflux pump that can export multiple antimicrobial drugs is a commonway for microbes to be resistant to multiple drugs by using a single resistance mechanism. In recent years, severalclinically important superbugs have emerged, and the CDC reports that superbugs are responsible for more than 2million infections in the US annually, resulting in at least 23,000 fatalities.[20] Several of the superbugs discussed inthe following sections have been dubbed the ESKAPE pathogens. This acronym refers to the names of the pathogens(Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonasaeruginosa and Enterobacter spp.) but it is also fitting in that these pathogens are able to “escape” many conventionalforms of antimicrobial therapy. As such, infections by ESKAPE pathogens can be difficult to treat and they cause alarge number of nosocomial infections.Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)Methicillin, a semisynthetic penicillin, was designed to resist inactivation by β-lactamases. Unfortunately, soon afterthe introduction of methicillin to clinical practice, methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus appeared and started tospread. The mechanism of resistance, acquisition of a new low-affinity PBP, provided S. aureus with resistance toall available β-lactams. Strains of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) are widespread opportunistic pathogensand a particular concern for skin and other wound infections, but may also cause pneumonia and septicemia.Although originally a problem in health-care settings (hospital-acquired MRSA [HA-MRSA]), MRSA infections arenow also acquired through contact with contaminated members of the general public, called community-associatedMRSA (CA-MRSA). Approximately one-third of the population carries S. aureus as a member of their normal nasalmicrobiota without illness, and about 6% of these strains are methicillin resistant.[21][22]Clavulanic Acid: Penicillin’s Little HelperWith the introduction of penicillin in the early 1940s, and its subsequent mass production, society began tothink of antibiotics as miracle cures for a wide range of infectious diseases. Unfortunately, as early as 1945,penicillin resistance was first documented and started to spread. Greater than 90% of current S. aureus clinicalisolates are resistant to penicillin.[23]Although developing new antimicrobial drugs is one solution to this problem, scientists have explored newMicro ConnectionsJournal 21 no. 10 (2002):2323–2331.20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic/Antimicrobial Resistance.” http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/index.html.Accessed June 2, 2016.21. A.S. Kalokhe et al. “Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis Drug Susceptibility and Molecular Diagnostic Testing: A Review of theLiterature. American Journal of the Medical Sciences 345 no. 2 (2013):143–148.22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA): General Information About MRSAin the Community.” http://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/community/index.html. Accessed June 2, 2016644 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5approaches, including the development of compounds that inactivate resistance mechanisms. Thedevelopment of clavulanic acid represents an early example of this strategy. Clavulanic acid is a moleculeproduced by the bacterium Streptococcus clavuligerus. It contains a β-lactam ring, making it structurally similarto penicillin and other β-lactams, but shows no clinical effectiveness when administered on its own. Instead,clavulanic acid binds irreversibly within the active site of β-lactamases and prevents them from inactivating acoadministered penicillin.Clavulanic acid was first developed in the 1970s and was mass marketed in combination with amoxicillinbeginning in the 1980s under the brand name Augmentin. As is typically the case, resistance to the amoxicillinclavulanicacid combination soon appeared. Resistance most commonly results from bacteria increasingproduction of their β-lactamase and overwhelming the inhibitory effects of clavulanic acid, mutating their β-lactamase so it is no longer inhibited by clavulanic acid, or from acquiring a new β-lactamase that is notinhibited by clavulanic acid. Despite increasing resistance concerns, clavulanic acid and related β-lactamaseinhibitors (sulbactam and tazobactam) represent an important new strategy: the development of compoundsthat directly inhibit antimicrobial resistance-conferring enzymes.Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and Staphylococcus aureusVancomycin is only effective against gram-positive organisms, and it is used to treat wound infections, septicinfections, endocarditis, and meningitis that are caused by pathogens resistant to other antibiotics. It is consideredone of the last lines of defense against such resistant infections, including MRSA. With the rise of antibioticresistance in the 1970s and 1980s, vancomycin use increased, and it is not surprising that we saw the emergence andspread of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA), and vancomycinintermediateS. aureus (VISA). The mechanism of vancomycin resistance among enterococci is target modificationinvolving a structural change to the peptide component of the peptidoglycan subunits, preventing vancomycin frombinding. These strains are typically spread among patients in clinical settings by contact with health-care workers andcontaminated surfaces and medical equipment.VISA and VRSA strains differ from each other in the mechanism of resistance and the degree of resistance eachmechanism confers. VISA strains exhibit intermediate resistance, with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of4–8 μg/mL, and the mechanism involves an increase in vancomycin targets. VISA strains decrease the crosslinkingof peptide chains in the cell wall, providing an increase in vancomycin targets that trap vancomycin in the outer cellwall. In contrast, VRSA strains acquire vancomycin resistance through horizontal transfer of resistance genes fromVRE, an opportunity provided in individuals coinfected with both VRE and MRSA. VRSA exhibit a higher level ofresistance, with MICs of 16 μg/mL or higher.[24] In the case of all three types of vancomycin-resistant bacteria, rapidclinical identification is necessary so proper procedures to limit spread can be implemented. The oxazolidinones likelinezolid are useful for the treatment of these vancomycin-resistant, opportunistic pathogens, as well as MRSA.Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamase–Producing Gram-Negative PathogensGram-negative pathogens that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) show resistance well beyond justpenicillins. The spectrum of β-lactams inactivated by ESBLs provides for resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins,monobactams, and the β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations, but not the carbapenems. An even greater concern is thatthe genes encoding for ESBLs are usually found on mobile plasmids that also contain genes for resistance to otherdrug classes (e.g., fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, tetracyclines), and may be readily spread to other bacteriaby horizontal gene transfer. These multidrug-resistant bacteria are members of the intestinal microbiota of someindividuals, but they are also important causes of opportunistic infections in hospitalized patients, from whom they23. F.D. Lowy. “Antimicrobial Resistance: The Example of Staphylococcus aureus.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 111 no. 9(2003):1265–1273.24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Healthcare-Associated Infections (HIA): General Information about VISA/VRSA.”http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/visa_vrsa/visa_vrsa.html. Accessed June 2, 2016.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 645can be spread to other people.Carbapenem-Resistant Gram-Negative BacteriaThe occurrence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) and carbapenem resistance among other gramnegativebacteria (e.g., P. aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, Stenotrophomonas maltophila) is a growing healthcareconcern. These pathogens develop resistance to carbapenems through a variety of mechanisms, includingproduction of carbapenemases (broad-spectrum β-lactamases that inactivate all β-lactams, including carbapenems),active efflux of carbapenems out of the cell, and/or prevention of carbapenem entry through porin channels. Similarto concerns with ESBLs, carbapenem-resistant, gram-negative pathogens are usually resistant to multiple classes ofantibacterials, and some have even developed pan-resistance (resistance to all available antibacterials). Infectionswith carbapenem-resistant, gram-negative pathogens commonly occur in health-care settings through interaction withcontaminated individuals or medical devices, or as a result of surgery.Multidrug-Resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosisThe emergence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistantMycobacterium tuberculosis (XDR-TB) is also of significant global concern. MDR-TB strains are resistant to bothrifampin and isoniazid, the drug combination typically prescribed for treatment of tuberculosis. XDR-TB strainsare additionally resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of three other drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, orcapreomycin) used as a second line of treatment, leaving these patients very few treatment options. Both typesof pathogens are particularly problematic in immunocompromised persons, including those suffering from HIVinfection. The development of resistance in these strains often results from the incorrect use of antimicrobials fortuberculosis treatment, selecting for resistance.• How does drug resistance lead to superbugs?To learn more about the top 18 drug-resistant threats (https://openstax.org/l/22CDC18drugres) to the US, visit the CDC’s website.Factory Farming and Drug ResistanceAlthough animal husbandry has long been a major part of agriculture in America, the rise of concentratedanimal feeding operations (CAFOs) since the 1950s has brought about some new environmental issues,including the contamination of water and air with biological waste, and ethical issues regarding animal rightsalso are associated with growing animals in this way. Additionally, the increase in CAFOs involves theextensive use of antimicrobial drugs in raising livestock. Antimicrobials are used to prevent the developmentof infectious disease in the close quarters of CAFOs; however, the majority of antimicrobials used in factoryLink to LearningMicro Connections646 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5farming are for the promotion of growth—in other words, to grow larger animals.The mechanism underlying this enhanced growth remains unclear. These antibiotics may not necessarily bethe same as those used clinically for humans, but they are structurally related to drugs used for humans. As aresult, use of antimicrobial drugs in animals can select for antimicrobial resistance, with these resistant bacteriabecoming cross-resistant to drugs typically used in humans. For example, tylosin use in animals appears toselect for bacteria also cross-resistant to other macrolides, including erythromycin, commonly used in humans.Concentrations of the drug-resistant bacterial strains generated by CAFOs become increased in water andsoil surrounding these farms. If not directly pathogenic in humans, these resistant bacteria may serve as areservoir of mobile genetic elements that can then pass resistance genes to human pathogens. Fortunately,the cooking process typically inactivates any antimicrobials remaining in meat, so humans typically are notdirectly ingesting these drugs. Nevertheless, many people are calling for more judicious use of these drugs,perhaps charging farmers user fees to reduce indiscriminate use. In fact, in 2012, the FDA published guidelinesfor farmers who voluntarily phase out the use of antimicrobial drugs except under veterinary supervision andwhen necessary to ensure animal health. Although following the guidelines is voluntary at this time, the FDAdoes recommend what it calls “judicious” use of antimicrobial drugs in food-producing animals in an effort todecrease antimicrobial resistance.Part 3Unfortunately, Marisa’s urinary tract infection did not resolve with ciprofloxacin treatment. Laboratory testingshowed that her infection was caused by a strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae with significant antimicrobialresistance. The resistance profile of this K. pneumoniae included resistance to the carbapenem class ofantibacterials, a group of β-lactams that is typically reserved for the treatment of highly resistant bacteria. K.pneumoniae is an opportunistic, capsulated, gram-negative rod that may be a member of the normal microbiotaof the intestinal tract, but may also cause a number of diseases, including pneumonia and UTIs.Specific laboratory tests looking for carbapenemase production were performed on Marisa’s samples andcame back positive. Based upon this result, in combination with her health history, production of acarbapenemase known as the New Delhi Metallo-β-lactamase (NDM) was suspected. Although the origin ofthe NDM carbapenemase is not completely known, many patients infected with NDM-containing strains havetravel histories involving hospitalizations in India or surrounding countries.• How would doctors determine which types of antimicrobial drugs should be administered?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of AntimicrobialsLearning Objectives• Describe how the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test determines the susceptibility of a microbe to an antibacterialdrug.• Explain the significance of the minimal inhibitory concentration and the minimal bactericidal concentrationrelative to the effectiveness of an antimicrobial drug.Testing the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs against specific organisms is important in identifying their spectrumof activity and the therapeutic dosage. This type of test, generally described as antimicrobial susceptibility testing(AST), is commonly performed in a clinical laboratory. In this section, we will discuss common methods of testingClinical FocusChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 647the effectiveness of antimicrobials.The Kirby-Bauer Disk Diffusion TestThe Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test has long been used as a starting point for determining the susceptibility ofspecific microbes to various antimicrobial drugs. The Kirby-Bauer assay starts with a Mueller-Hinton agar plate onwhich a confluent lawn is inoculated with a patient’s isolated bacterial pathogen. Filter paper disks impregnated withknown amounts of antibacterial drugs to be tested are then placed on the agar plate. As the bacterial inoculum grows,antibiotic diffuses from the circular disk into the agar and interacts with the growing bacteria. Antibacterial activityis observed as a clear circular zone of inhibition around the drug-impregnated disk, similar to the disk-diffusionassay depicted in Figure 13.31. The diameter of the zone of inhibition, measured in millimeters and compared to astandardized chart, determines the susceptibility or resistance of the bacterial pathogen to the drug.There are multiple factors that determine the size of a zone of inhibition in this assay, including drug solubility, rateof drug diffusion through agar, the thickness of the agar medium, and the drug concentration impregnated into thedisk. Due to a lack of standardization of these factors, interpretation of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion assay providesonly limited information on susceptibility and resistance to the drugs tested. The assay cannot distinguish betweenbacteriostatic and bactericidal activities, and differences in zone sizes cannot be used to compare drug potencies orefficacies. Comparison of zone sizes to a standardized chart will only provide information on the antibacterials towhich a bacterial pathogen is susceptible or resistant.• How does one use the information from a Kirby-Bauer assay to predict the therapeutic effectiveness of anantimicrobial drug in a patient?Antibiograms: Taking Some of the Guesswork Out of PrescriptionsUnfortunately, infectious diseases don’t take a time-out for lab work. As a result, physicians rarely have theluxury of conducting susceptibility testing before they write a prescription. Instead, they rely primarily on theempirical evidence (i.e., the signs and symptoms of disease) and their professional experience to make aneducated guess as to the diagnosis, causative agent(s), and drug most likely to be effective. This approachallows treatment to begin sooner so the patient does not have to wait for lab test results. In many cases, theprescription is effective; however, in an age of increased antimicrobial resistance, it is becoming increasinglymore difficult to select the most appropriate empiric therapy. Selecting an inappropriate empiric therapy notonly puts the patient at risk but may promote greater resistance to the drug prescribed.Recently, studies have shown that antibiograms are useful tools in the decision-making process of selectingappropriate empiric therapy. An antibiogram is a compilation of local antibiotic susceptibility data brokendown by bacterial pathogen. In a November 2014 study published in the journal Infection Control and HospitalEpidemiology, researchers determined that 85% of the prescriptions ordered in skilled nursing facilities weredecided upon empirically, but only 35% of those prescriptions were deemed appropriate when compared withthe eventual pathogen identification and susceptibility profile obtained from the clinical laboratory. However,in one nursing facility where use of antibiograms was implemented to direct selection of empiric therapy,appropriateness of empiric therapy increased from 32% before antibiogram implementation to 45% afterimplementation of antibiograms.[25] Although these data are preliminary, they do suggest that health-carefacilities can reduce the number of inappropriate prescriptions by using antibiograms to select empiric therapy,thus benefiting patients and minimizing opportunities for antimicrobial resistance to develop.Micro Connections648 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Visit this website to view an interactive antibiogram (https://openstax.org/l/22StanUnintanti) provided by Stanford University.Dilution TestsAs discussed, the limitations of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test do not allow for a direct comparison ofantibacterial potencies to guide selection of the best therapeutic choice. However, antibacterial dilution tests can beused to determine a particular drug’s minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), the lowest concentration of drug thatinhibits visible bacterial growth, and minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC), the lowest drug concentration thatkills ≥99.9% of the starting inoculum. Determining these concentrations helps identify the correct drug for a particularpathogen. For the macrobroth dilution assay, a dilution series of the drug in broth is made in test tubes and the samenumber of cells of a test bacterial strain is added to each tube (Figure 14.19). The MIC is determined by examiningthe tubes to find the lowest drug concentration that inhibits visible growth; this is observed as turbidity (cloudiness)in the broth. Tubes with no visible growth are then inoculated onto agar media without antibiotic to determine theMBC. Generally, serum levels of an antibacterial should be at least three to five times above the MIC for treatment ofan infection.The MIC assay can also be performed using 96-well microdilution trays, which allow for the use of small volumesand automated dispensing devices, as well as the testing of multiple antimicrobials and/or microorganisms in one tray(Figure 14.20). MICs are interpreted as the lowest concentration that inhibits visible growth, the same as for themacrobroth dilution in test tubes. Growth may also be interpreted visually or by using a spectrophotometer or similardevice to detect turbidity or a color change if an appropriate biochemical substrate that changes color in the presenceof bacterial growth is also included in each well.The Etest is an alternative method used to determine MIC, and is a combination of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusiontest and dilution methods. Similar to the Kirby-Bauer assay, a confluent lawn of a bacterial isolate is inoculated ontothe surface of an agar plate. Rather than using circular disks impregnated with one concentration of drug, however,commercially available plastic strips that contain a gradient of an antibacterial are placed on the surface of theinoculated agar plate (Figure 14.21). As the bacterial inoculum grows, antibiotic diffuses from the plastic strips intothe agar and interacts with the bacterial cells. Because the rate of drug diffusion is directly related to concentration, anelliptical zone of inhibition is observed with the Etest drug gradient, rather than a circular zone of inhibition observedwith the Kirby-Bauer assay. To interpret the results, the intersection of the elliptical zone with the gradient on thedrug-containing strip indicates the MIC. Because multiple strips containing different antimicrobials can be placed onthe same plate, the MIC of multiple antimicrobials can be determined concurrently and directly compared. However,unlike the macrobroth and microbroth dilution methods, the MBC cannot be determined with the Etest.Link to Learning25. J.P. Furuno et al. “Using Antibiograms to Improve Antibiotic Prescribing in Skilled Nursing Facilities.” Infection Control and HospitalEpidemiology 35 no. Suppl S3 (2014):S56–61.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 649Figure 14.19 In a dilution test, the lowest dilution that inhibits turbidity (cloudiness) is the MIC. In this example, theMIC is 8 μg/mL. Broth from samples without turbidity can be inoculated onto plates lacking the antimicrobial drug. Thelowest dilution that kills ≥99.9% of the starting inoculum is observed on the plates is the MBC. (credit: modification ofwork by Suzanne Wakim)Figure 14.20 A microdilution tray can also be used to determine MICs of multiple antimicrobial drugs in a singleassay. In this example, the drug concentrations increase from left to right and the rows with clindamycin, penicillin,and erythromycin have been indicated to the left of the plate. For penicillin and erythromycin, the lowestconcentrations that inhibited visible growth are indicated by red circles and were 0.06 μg/mL for penicillin and 8 μg/mL for erythromycin. For clindamycin, visible bacterial growth was observed at every concentration up to 32 μg/mLand the MIC is interpreted as >32 μg/mL. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)650 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 14.21 The Etest can be used to determine the MIC of an antibiotic. In this Etest, vancomycin is shown tohave a MIC of 1.5 μg/mL against Staphylococcus aureus.• Compare and contrast MIC and MBC.ResolutionMarisa’s UTI was likely caused by the catheterizations she had in Vietnam. Most bacteria that cause UTIs aremembers of the normal gut microbiota, but they can cause infections when introduced to the urinary tract, asmight have occurred when the catheter was inserted. Alternatively, if the catheter itself was not sterile, bacteriaon its surface could have been introduced into Marisa’s body. The antimicrobial therapy Marisa received inCambodia may also have been a complicating factor because it may have selected for antimicrobial-resistantstrains already present in her body. These bacteria would have already contained genes for antimicrobialresistance, either acquired by spontaneous mutation or through horizontal gene transfer, and, therefore, hadthe best evolutionary advantage for adaptation and growth in the presence of the antimicrobial therapy. As aresult, one of these resistant strains may have been subsequently introduced into her urinary tract.Laboratory testing at the CDC confirmed that the strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae from Marisa’s urine samplewas positive for the presence of NDM, a very active carbapenemase that is beginning to emerge as a newproblem in antimicrobial resistance. While NDM-positive strains are resistant to a wide range of antimicrobials,they have shown susceptibility to tigecycline (structurally related to tetracycline) and the polymyxins B and E(colistin).To prevent her infection from spreading, Marisa was isolated from the other patients in a separate room. Allhospital staff interacting with her were advised to follow strict protocols to prevent surface and equipmentcontamination. This would include especially stringent hand hygiene practices and careful disinfection of allitems coming into contact with her.Marisa’s infection finally responded to tigecycline and eventually cleared. She was discharged a few weeksafter admission, and a follow-up stool sample showed her stool to be free of NDM-containing K. pneumoniae,meaning that she was no longer harboring the highly resistant bacterium.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical FocusChapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 65114.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial DiscoveryLearning Objectives• Describe the methods and strategies used for discovery of new antimicrobial agents.With the continued evolution and spread of antimicrobial resistance, and now the identification of pan-resistantbacterial pathogens, the search for new antimicrobials is essential for preventing the postantibiotic era. Althoughdevelopment of more effective semisynthetic derivatives is one strategy, resistance to them develops rapidly becausebacterial pathogens are already resistant to earlier-generation drugs in the family and can easily mutate and developresistance to the new semisynthetic drugs. Today, scientists continue to hunt for new antimicrobial compounds andexplore new avenues of antimicrobial discovery and synthesis. They check large numbers of soils and microbialproducts for antimicrobial activity by using high-throughput screening methods, which use automation to test largenumbers of samples simultaneously. The recent development of the iChip[26] allows researchers to investigate theantimicrobial-producing capabilities of soil microbes that are difficult to grow by standard cultivation techniques inthe laboratory. Rather than grow the microbes in the laboratory, they are grown in situ—right in the soil. Use ofthe iChip has resulted in the discovery of teixobactin, a novel antimicrobial from Mount Ararat, Turkey. Teixobactintargets two distinct steps in gram-positive cell wall synthesis and for which antimicrobial resistance appears not yetto have evolved.Although soils have been widely examined, other environmental niches have not been tested as fully. Since 70% ofthe earth is covered with water, marine environments could be mined more fully for the presence of antimicrobialproducingmicrobes. In addition, researchers are using combinatorial chemistry, a method for making a very largenumber of related compounds from simple precursors, and testing them for antimicrobial activity. An additionalstrategy that needs to be explored further is the development of compounds that inhibit resistance mechanisms andrestore the activity of older drugs, such as the strategy described earlier for β-lactamase inhibitors like clavulanic acid.Finally, developing inhibitors of virulence factor production and function could be a very important avenue. Althoughthis strategy would not be directly antibacterial, drugs that slow the progression of an infection could provide anadvantage for the immune system and could be used successfully in combination with antimicrobial drugs.• What are new sources and strategies for developing drugs to fight infectious diseases?The (Free?) Market for New AntimicrobialsThere used to be plenty of antimicrobial drugs on the market to treat infectious diseases. However, thespread of antimicrobial resistance has created a need for new antibiotics to replace those that are no longeras effective as they once were. Unfortunately, pharmaceutical companies are not particularly motivated tofill this need. As of 2009, all but five pharmaceutical companies had moved away from antimicrobial drugdevelopment.[27] As a result, the number of FDA approvals of new antimicrobials has fallen drastically in recentdecades (Figure 14.22).Eye on Ethics26. L. Losee et al. “A New Antibiotic Kills Pathogens Without Detectable Resistance.” Nature 517 no. 7535 (2015):455–459.652 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Given that demand usually encourages supply, one might expect pharmaceutical companies to be rushing toget back in the business of developing new antibiotics. But developing new drugs is a lengthy process andrequires large investments in research and development. Pharmaceutical companies can typically get a higherreturn on their investment by developing products for chronic, nonmicrobial diseases like diabetes; such drugsmust be taken for life, and therefore generate more long-term revenue than an antibiotic that does its job in aweek or two. But what will happen when drugs like vancomycin, a superantimicrobial reserved for use as a lastresort, begin to lose their effectiveness against ever more drug-resistant superbugs? Will drug companies waituntil all antibiotics have become useless before beginning to look for new ones?Recently, it has been suggested that large pharmaceutical companies should be given financial incentives topursue such research. In September 2014, the White House released an executive order entitled “CombatingAntibiotic Resistant Bacteria,” calling upon various government agencies and the private sector to worktogether to “accelerate basic and applied research and development for new antimicrobials, other therapeutics,and vaccines.”[28] As a result, as of March 2015, President Obama’s proposed fiscal year 2016 budgetdoubled the amount of federal funding to $1.2 billion for “combating and preventing antibiotic resistance,” whichincludes money for antimicrobial research and development.[29] Similar suggestions have also been made ona global scale. In December 2014, a report chaired by former Goldman Sachs economist Jim O’Neill waspublished in The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance.[30]These developments reflect the growing belief that for-profit pharmaceutical companies must be subsidizedto encourage development of new antimicrobials. But some ask whether pharmaceutical development shouldbe motivated by profit at all. Given that millions of lives may hang in the balance, some might argue that drugcompanies have an ethical obligation to devote their research and development efforts to high-utility drugs,as opposed to highly profitable ones. Yet this obligation conflicts with the fundamental goals of a for-profitcompany. Are government subsidies enough to ensure that drug companies make the public interest a priority,or should government agencies assume responsibility for developing critical drugs that may have little or noreturn on investment?Figure 14.22 In recent decades, approvals of new antimicrobials by the FDA have steadily fallen. In the fiveyearperiod from 1983–1987, 16 new antimicrobial drugs were approved, compared to just two from2008–2012.27. H.W. Boucher et al. “Bad Bugs, No Drugs: No ESKAPE! An Update from the Infectious Diseases Society of America.” ClinicalInfectious Diseases 48 no. 1 (2009):1–12.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 653To further examine the scope of the problem, view this (https://openstax.org/l/22PBSDecAntimic) video.To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22MSUAntResLeaH) about the historyof antimicrobial drug discovery, visit Michigan State University’s AntimicrobialResistance Learning Site.Summary14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial Discovery• Antimicrobial drugs produced by purposeful fermentation and/or contained in plants have been used astraditional medicines in many cultures for millennia.• The purposeful and systematic search for a chemical “magic bullet” that specifically target infectious microbeswas initiated by Paul Ehrlich in the early 20th century.• The discovery of the natural antibiotic, penicillin, by Alexander Fleming in 1928 started the modern age ofantimicrobial discovery and research.• Sulfanilamide, the first synthetic antimicrobial, was discovered by Gerhard Domagk and colleagues and is abreakdown product of the synthetic dye, prontosil.14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy• Antimicrobial drugs can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal, and these characteristics are importantconsiderations when selecting the most appropriate drug.• The use of narrow-spectrum antimicrobial drugs is preferred in many cases to avoid superinfection and thedevelopment of antimicrobial resistance.• Broad-spectrum antimicrobial use is warranted for serious systemic infections when there is no time todetermine the causative agent, when narrow-spectrum antimicrobials fail, or for the treatment or preventionof infections with multiple types of microbes.• The dosage and route of administration are important considerations when selecting an antimicrobial to treatand infection. Other considerations include the patient’s age, mass, ability to take oral medications, liver andkidney function, and possible interactions with other drugs the patient may be taking.14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs• Antibacterial compounds exhibit selective toxicity, largely due to differences between prokaryotic andeukaryotic cell structure.• Cell wall synthesis inhibitors, including the β-lactams, the glycopeptides, and bacitracin, interfere withpeptidoglycan synthesis, making bacterial cells more prone to osmotic lysis.• There are a variety of broad-spectrum, bacterial protein synthesis inhibitors that selectively target theprokaryotic 70S ribosome, including those that bind to the 30S subunit (aminoglycosides and tetracyclines)and others that bind to the 50S subunit (macrolides, lincosamides, chloramphenicol, and oxazolidinones).• Polymyxins are lipophilic polypeptide antibiotics that target the lipopolysaccharide component of gramnegativebacteria and ultimately disrupt the integrity of the outer and inner membranes of these bacteria.Link to Learning28. The White House. National Action Plan for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria. Washington, DC: The White House, 2015.29. White House Office of the Press Secretary. “Fact Sheet: Obama Administration Releases National Action Plan to Combat Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria.” March 27, 2015. https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/27/fact-sheet-obama-administration-releasesnational-action-plan-combat-ant30. Review on Antimicrobial Resistance. http://amr-review.org. Accessed June 1, 2016.654 Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial DrugsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• The nucleic acid synthesis inhibitors rifamycins and fluoroquinolones target bacterial RNA transcription andDNA replication, respectively.• Some antibacterial drugs are antimetabolites, acting as competitive inhibitors for bacterial metabolicenzymes. Sulfonamides and trimethoprim are antimetabolites that interfere with bacterial folic acidsynthesis. Isoniazid is an antimetabolite that interferes with mycolic acid synthesis in mycobacteria.14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial Drugs• Because fungi, protozoans, and helminths are eukaryotic organisms like human cells, it is more challenging todevelop antimicrobial drugs that specifically target them. Similarly, it is hard to target viruses because humanviruses replicate inside of human cells.• Antifungal drugs interfere with ergosterol synthesis, bind to ergosterol to disrupt fungal cell membraneintegrity, or target cell wall-specific components or other cellular proteins.• Antiprotozoan drugs increase cellular levels of reactive oxygen species, interfere with protozoal DNAreplication (nuclear versus kDNA, respectively), and disrupt heme detoxification.• Antihelminthic drugs disrupt helminthic and protozoan microtubule formation; block neuronaltransmissions; inhibit anaerobic ATP formation and/or oxidative phosphorylation; induce a calcium influx intapeworms, leading to spasms and paralysis; and interfere with RNA synthesis in schistosomes.• Antiviral drugs inhibit viral entry, inhibit viral uncoating, inhibit nucleic acid biosynthesis, prevent viralescape from endosomes in host cells, and prevent viral release from infected cells.• Because it can easily mutate to become drug resistant, HIV is typically treated with a combination of severalantiretroviral drugs, which may include reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, integraseinhibitors, and drugs that interfere with viral binding and fusion to initiate infection.14.5 Drug Resistance• Antimicrobial resistance is on the rise and is the result of selection of drug-resistant strains in clinicalenvironments, the overuse and misuse of antibacterials, the use of subtherapeutic doses of antibacterial drugs,and poor patient compliance with antibacterial drug therapies.• Drug resistance genes are often carried on plasmids or in transposons that can undergo vertical transfer easilyand between microbes through horizontal gene transfer.• Common modes of antimicrobial drug resistance include drug modification or inactivation, prevention ofcellular uptake or efflux, target modification, target overproduction or enzymatic bypass, and target mimicry.• Problematic microbial strains showing extensive antimicrobial resistance are emerging; many of these strainscan reside as members of the normal microbiota in individuals but also can cause opportunistic infection. Thetransmission of many of these highly resistant microbial strains often occurs in clinical settings, but can alsobe community-acquired.14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of Antimicrobials• The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test helps determine the susceptibility of a microorganism to variousantimicrobial drugs. However, the zones of inhibition measured must be correlated to known standards todetermine susceptibility and resistance, and do not provide information on bactericidal versus bacteriostaticactivity, or allow for direct comparison of drug potencies.• Antibiograms are useful for monitoring local trends in antimicrobial resistance/susceptibility and for directingappropriate selection of empiric antibacterial therapy.• There are several laboratory methods available for determining the minimum inhibitory concentration(MIC) of an antimicrobial drug against a specific microbe. The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC)can also be determined, typically as a follow-up experiment to MIC determination using the tube dilutionmethod.14.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial Discovery• Current research into the development of antimicrobial drugs involves the use of high-throughput screeningand combinatorial chemistry technologies.Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs 655• New technologies are being developed to discover novel antibiotics from soil microorganisms that cannot becultured by standard laboratory methods.• Additional strategies include searching for antibiotics from sources other than soil, identifying newantibacterial targets, using combinatorial chemistry to develop novel drugs, developing drugs that inhibitresistance mechanisms, and developing drugs that target virulence factors and hold infections in check.