Chapter 7Microbial BiochemistryFigure 7.1 Scientist Stanley Miller (pictured) and Harold Urey demonstrated that organic compounds may haveoriginated naturally from inorganic matter. The Miller-Urey experiment illustrated here simulated the effects oflightning on chemical compounds found in the earth’s early atmosphere. The resulting reactions yielded amino acids,the chemical building blocks of proteins. (credit “photo”: modification of work by NASA; credit “illustration”:modification of work by Courtney Harrington)Chapter Outline7.1 Organic Molecules7.2 Carbohydrates7.3 Lipids7.4 Proteins7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify MicroorganismsIntroductionThe earth is estimated to be 4.6 billion years old, but for the first 2 billion years, the atmosphere lacked oxygen,without which the earth could not support life as we know it. One hypothesis about how life emerged on earth involvesthe concept of a “primordial soup.” This idea proposes that life began in a body of water when metals and gasesfrom the atmosphere combined with a source of energy, such as lightning or ultraviolet light, to form the carboncompounds that are the chemical building blocks of life. In 1952, Stanley Miller (1930–2007), a graduate student atthe University of Chicago, and his professor Harold Urey (1893–1981), set out to confirm this hypothesis in a nowfamousexperiment. Miller and Urey combined what they believed to be the major components of the earth’s earlyatmosphere—water (H2O), methane (CH4), hydrogen (H2), and ammonia (NH3)—and sealed them in a sterile flask.Next, they heated the flask to produce water vapor and passed electric sparks through the mixture to mimic lightningin the atmosphere (Figure 7.1). When they analyzed the contents of the flask a week later, they found amino acids,the structural units of proteins—molecules essential to the function of all organisms.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 2857.1 Organic MoleculesLearning Objectives• Identify common elements and structures found in organic molecules• Explain the concept of isomerism• Identify examples of functional groups• Describe the role of functional groups in synthesizing polymersBiochemistry is the discipline that studies the chemistry of life, and its objective is to explain form and function basedon chemical principles. Organic chemistry is the discipline devoted to the study of carbon-based chemistry, whichis the foundation for the study of biomolecules and the discipline of biochemistry. Both biochemistry and organicchemistry are based on the concepts of general chemistry, some of which are presented in Appendix A.Elements in Living CellsThe most abundant element in cells is hydrogen (H), followed by carbon (C), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), phosphorous(P), and sulfur (S). We call these elements macronutrients, and they account for about 99% of the dry weight ofcells. Some elements, such as sodium (Na), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), iron (Fe), calcium (Ca),molybdenum (Mo), copper (Cu), cobalt (Co), manganese (Mn), or vanadium (Va), are required by some cells in verysmall amounts and are called micronutrients or trace elements. All of these elements are essential to the function ofmany biochemical reactions, and, therefore, are essential to life.The four most abundant elements in living matter (C, N, O, and H) have low atomic numbers and are thus lightelements capable of forming strong bonds with other atoms to produce molecules (Figure 7.2). Carbon forms fourchemical bonds, whereas nitrogen forms three, oxygen forms two, and hydrogen forms one. When bonded togetherwithin molecules, oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen often have one or more “lone pairs” of electrons that play importantroles in determining many of the molecules’ physical and chemical properties (see Appendix A). These traits incombination permit the formation of a vast number of diverse molecular species necessary to form the structures andenable the functions of living organisms.Part 1Penny is a 16-year-old student who visited her doctor, complaining about an itchy skin rash. She had a historyof allergic episodes. The doctor looked at her sun-tanned skin and asked her if she switched to a differentsunscreen. She said she had, so the doctor diagnosed an allergic eczema. The symptoms were mild so thedoctor told Penny to avoid using the sunscreen that caused the reaction and prescribed an over-the-countermoisturizing cream to keep her skin hydrated and to help with itching.• What kinds of substances would you expect to find in a moisturizing cream?• What physical or chemical properties of these substances would help alleviate itching and inflammationof the skin?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus286 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.2 Some common molecules include carbon dioxide, ammonia, and oxygen, which consist of combinationsof oxygen atoms (red spheres), carbon atoms (gray spheres), hydrogen atoms (white spheres), or nitrogen atoms(blue spheres).Living organisms contain inorganic compounds (mainly water and salts; see Appendix A) and organic molecules.Organic molecules contain carbon; inorganic compounds do not. Carbon oxides and carbonates are exceptions; theycontain carbon but are considered inorganic because they do not contain hydrogen. The atoms of an organic moleculeare typically organized around chains of carbon atoms.Inorganic compounds make up 1%–1.5% of a living cell’s mass. They are small, simple compounds that playimportant roles in the cell, although they do not form cell structures. Most of the carbon found in organic moleculesoriginates from inorganic carbon sources such as carbon dioxide captured via carbon fixation by microorganisms.• Describe the most abundant elements in nature.• Describe the most abundant elements in natureWhat are the differences between organic and inorganicmolecules?Organic Molecules and IsomerismOrganic molecules in organisms are generally larger and more complex than inorganic molecules. Their carbonskeletons are held together by covalent bonds. They form the cells of an organism and perform the chemical reactionsthat facilitate life. All of these molecules, called biomolecules because they are part of living matter, contain carbon,which is the building block of life. Carbon is a very unique element in that it has four valence electrons in its outerorbitals and can form four single covalent bonds with up to four other atoms at the same time (see Appendix A).These atoms are usually oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, and carbon itself; the simplest organiccompound is methane, in which carbon binds only to hydrogen (Figure 7.3).As a result of carbon’s unique combination of size and bonding properties, carbon atoms can bind together in largenumbers, thus producing a chain or carbon skeleton. The carbon skeleton of organic molecules can be straight,branched, or ring shaped (cyclic). Organic molecules are built on chains of carbon atoms of varying lengths; most aretypically very long, which allows for a huge number and variety of compounds. No other element has the ability toform so many different molecules of so many different sizes and shapes.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 287Figure 7.3 A carbon atom can bond with up to four other atoms. The simplest organic molecule is methane (CH4),depicted here.Molecules with the same atomic makeup but different structural arrangement of atoms are called isomers. Theconcept of isomerism is very important in chemistry because the structure of a molecule is always directly relatedto its function. Slight changes in the structural arrangements of atoms in a molecule may lead to very differentproperties. Chemists represent molecules by their structural formula, which is a graphic representation of themolecular structure, showing how the atoms are arranged. Compounds that have identical molecular formulas butdiffer in the bonding sequence of the atoms are called structural isomers. The monosaccharides glucose, galactose,and fructose all have the same molecular formula, C6H12O6, but we can see from Figure 7.4 that the atoms arebonded together differently.Figure 7.4 Glucose, galactose, and fructose have the same chemical formula (C6H12O6), but these structuralisomers differ in their physical and chemical properties.Isomers that differ in the spatial arrangements of atoms are called stereoisomers; one unique type is enantiomers.The properties of enantiomers were originally discovered by Louis Pasteur in 1848 while using a microscopeto analyze crystallized fermentation products of wine. Enantiomers are molecules that have the characteristic ofchirality, in which their structures are nonsuperimposable mirror images of each other. Chirality is an importantcharacteristic in many biologically important molecules, as illustrated by the examples of structural differences in theenantiomeric forms of the monosaccharide glucose or the amino acid alanine (Figure 7.5).Many organisms are only able to use one enantiomeric form of certain types of molecules as nutrients and as buildingblocks to make structures within a cell. Some enantiomeric forms of amino acids have distinctly different tastes andsmells when consumed as food. For example, L-aspartame, commonly called aspartame, tastes sweet, whereas Daspartameis tasteless. Drug enantiomers can have very different pharmacologic affects. For example, the compound288 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5methorphan exists as two enantiomers, one of which acts as an antitussive (dextromethorphan, a cough suppressant),whereas the other acts as an analgesic (levomethorphan, a drug similar in effect to codeine).Figure 7.5 Enantiomers are stereoisomers that exhibit chirality. Their chemical structures are nonsuperimposablemirror images of each other. (a) D-glucose and L-glucose are monosaccharides that are enantiomers. (b) Theenantiomers D-alanine and L-alanine are enantiomers found in bacterial cell walls and human cells, respectively.Enantiomers are also called optical isomers because they can rotate the plane of polarized light. Some of the crystalsPasteur observed from wine fermentation rotated light clockwise whereas others rotated the light counterclockwise.Today, we denote enantiomers that rotate polarized light clockwise (+) as d forms, and the mirror image of the samemolecule that rotates polarized light counterclockwise (−) as the l form. The d and l labels are derived from theLatin words dexter (on the right) and laevus (on the left), respectively. These two different optical isomers often havevery different biological properties and activities. Certain species of molds, yeast, and bacteria, such as Rhizopus,Yarrowia, and Lactobacillus spp., respectively, can only metabolize one type of optical isomer; the opposite isomeris not suitable as a source of nutrients. Another important reason to be aware of optical isomers is the therapeutic useof these types of chemicals for drug treatment, because some microorganisms can only be affected by one specificoptical isomer.• We say that life is carbon based. What makes carbon so suitable to be part of all the macromolecules of livingorganisms?Biologically Significant Functional GroupsIn addition to containing carbon atoms, biomolecules also contain functional groups—groups of atoms withinmolecules that are categorized by their specific chemical composition and the chemical reactions they perform,regardless of the molecule in which the group is found. Some of the most common functional groups are listed inFigure 7.6. In the formulas, the symbol R stands for “residue” and represents the remainder of the molecule. Rmight symbolize just a single hydrogen atom or it may represent a group of many atoms. Notice that some functionalgroups are relatively simple, consisting of just one or two atoms, while some comprise two of these simpler functionalgroups. For example, a carbonyl group is a functional group composed of a carbon atom double bonded to an oxygenatom: C=O. It is present in several classes of organic compounds as part of larger functional groups such as ketones,aldehydes, carboxylic acids, and amides. In ketones, the carbonyl is present as an internal group, whereas in aldehydesit is a terminal group.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 289Figure 7.6MacromoleculesCarbon chains form the skeletons of most organic molecules. Functional groups combine with the chain to form290 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5biomolecules. Because these biomolecules are typically large, we call them macromolecules. Many biologicallyrelevant macromolecules are formed by linking together a great number of identical, or very similar, smaller organicmolecules. The smaller molecules act as building blocks and are called monomers, and the macromolecules thatresult from their linkage are called polymers. Cells and cell structures include four main groups of carbon-containingmacromolecules: polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. The first three groups of molecules will bestudied throughout this chapter. The biochemistry of nucleic acids will be discussed in Biochemistry of theGenome.Of the many possible ways that monomers may be combined to yield polymers, one common approach encountered inthe formation of biological macromolecules is dehydration synthesis. In this chemical reaction, monomer moleculesbind end to end in a process that results in the formation of water molecules as a byproduct:H—monomer—OH + H—monomer—OH ⟶ H—monomer—monomer—OH + H2 OFigure 7.7 shows dehydration synthesis of glucose binding together to form maltose and a water molecule. Table7.1 summarizes macromolecules and some of their functions.Figure 7.7 In this dehydration synthesis reaction, two molecules of glucose are linked together to form maltose. Inthe process, a water molecule is formed.Some Functions of MacromoleculesMacromolecule FunctionsCarbohydrates Energy storage, receptors, food, structural role in plants, fungal cell walls, exoskeletons ofinsectsLipids Energy storage, membrane structure, insulation, hormones, pigmentsNucleic acids Storage and transfer of genetic informationProteins Enzymes, structure, receptors, transport, structural role in the cytoskeleton of a cell and theextracellular matrixTable 7.1• What is the byproduct of a dehydration synthesis reaction?Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 2917.2 CarbohydratesLearning Objectives• Give examples of monosaccharides and polysaccharides• Describe the function of monosaccharides and polysaccharides within a cellThe most abundant biomolecules on earth are carbohydrates. From a chemical viewpoint, carbohydrates areprimarily a combination of carbon and water, and many of them have the empirical formula (CH2O)n, where n is thenumber of repeated units. This view represents these molecules simply as “hydrated” carbon atom chains in whichwater molecules attach to each carbon atom, leading to the term “carbohydrates.” Although all carbohydrates containcarbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, there are some that also contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and/or sulfur. Carbohydrateshave myriad different functions. They are abundant in terrestrial ecosystems, many forms of which we use as foodsources. These molecules are also vital parts of macromolecular structures that store and transmit genetic information(i.e., DNA and RNA). They are the basis of biological polymers that impart strength to various structural componentsof organisms (e.g., cellulose and chitin), and they are the primary source of energy storage in the form of starch andglycogen.Monosaccharides: The Sweet OnesIn biochemistry, carbohydrates are often called saccharides, from the Greek sakcharon, meaning sugar, although notall the saccharides are sweet. The simplest carbohydrates are called monosaccharides, or simple sugars. They arethe building blocks (monomers) for the synthesis of polymers or complex carbohydrates, as will be discussed furtherin this section. Monosaccharides are classified based on the number of carbons in the molecule. General categoriesare identified using a prefix that indicates the number of carbons and the suffix –ose, which indicates a saccharide;for example, triose (three carbons), tetrose (four carbons), pentose (five carbons), and hexose (six carbons) (Figure7.8). The hexose D-glucose is the most abundant monosaccharide in nature. Other very common and abundant hexosemonosaccharides are galactose, used to make the disaccharide milk sugar lactose, and the fruit sugar fructose.292 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.8 Monosaccharides are classified based on the position of the carbonyl group and the number of carbonsin the backbone.Monosaccharides of four or more carbon atoms are typically more stable when they adopt cyclic, or ring, structures.These ring structures result from a chemical reaction between functional groups on opposite ends of the sugar’sflexible carbon chain, namely the carbonyl group and a relatively distant hydroxyl group. Glucose, for example, formsa six-membered ring (Figure 7.9).Figure 7.9 (a) A linear monosaccharide (glucose in this case) forms a cyclic structure. (b) This illustration shows amore realistic depiction of the cyclic monosaccharide structure. Note in these cyclic structural diagrams, the carbonatoms composing the ring are not explicitly shown.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 293• Why do monosaccharides form ring structures?DisaccharidesTwo monosaccharide molecules may chemically bond to form a disaccharide. The name given to the covalent bondbetween the two monosaccharides is a glycosidic bond. Glycosidic bonds form between hydroxyl groups of the twosaccharide molecules, an example of the dehydration synthesis described in the previous section of this chapter:monosaccharide—OH + HO—monosaccharide ⟶ monosaccharide—O—monosaccharide⎤⎦ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥disaccharideCommon disaccharides are the grain sugar maltose, made of two glucose molecules; the milk sugar lactose, made ofa galactose and a glucose molecule; and the table sugar sucrose, made of a glucose and a fructose molecule (Figure7.10).Figure 7.10 Common disaccharides include maltose, lactose, and sucrose.PolysaccharidesPolysaccharides, also called glycans, are large polymers composed of hundreds of monosaccharide monomers.Unlike mono- and disaccharides, polysaccharides are not sweet and, in general, they are not soluble in water. Likedisaccharides, the monomeric units of polysaccharides are linked together by glycosidic bonds.Polysaccharides are very diverse in their structure. Three of the most biologically important polysaccharides—starch,glycogen, and cellulose—are all composed of repetitive glucose units, although they differ in their structure (Figure7.11). Cellulose consists of a linear chain of glucose molecules and is a common structural component of cell wallsin plants and other organisms. Glycogen and starch are branched polymers; glycogen is the primary energy-storage294 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5molecule in animals and bacteria, whereas plants primarily store energy in starch. The orientation of the glycosidiclinkages in these three polymers is different as well and, as a consequence, linear and branched macromolecules havedifferent properties.Modified glucose molecules can be fundamental components of other structural polysaccharides. Examples of thesetypes of structural polysaccharides are N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) and N-acetyl muramic acid (NAM) found inbacterial cell wall peptidoglycan. Polymers of NAG form chitin, which is found in fungal cell walls and in theexoskeleton of insects.Figure 7.11 Starch, glycogen, and cellulose are three of the most important polysaccharides. In the top row,hexagons represent individual glucose molecules. Micrographs (bottom row) show wheat starch granules stained withiodine (left), glycogen granules (G) inside the cell of a cyanobacterium (middle), and bacterial cellulose fibers (right).(credit “iodine granules”: modification of work by Kiselov Yuri; credit “glycogen granules”: modification of work byStöckel J, Elvitigala TR, Liberton M, Pakrasi HB; credit “cellulose”: modification of work by American Society forMicrobiology)• What are the most biologically important polysaccharides and why are they important?Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 2957.3 LipidsLearning ObjectivesDescribe the chemical composition of lipids• Describe the unique characteristics and diverse structures of lipids• Compare and contrast triacylglycerides (triglycerides) and phospholipids.• Describe how phospholipids are used to construct biological membranes.Although they are composed primarily of carbon and hydrogen, lipid molecules may also contain oxygen, nitrogen,sulfur, and phosphorous. Lipids serve numerous and diverse purposes in the structure and functions of organisms.They can be a source of nutrients, a storage form for carbon, energy-storage molecules, or structural components ofmembranes and hormones. Lipids comprise a broad class of many chemically distinct compounds, the most commonof which are discussed in this section.Fatty Acids and TriacylglyceridesThe fatty acids are lipids that contain long-chain hydrocarbons terminated with a carboxylic acid functional group.Because the long hydrocarbon chain, fatty acids are hydrophobic (“water fearing”) or nonpolar. Fatty acids withhydrocarbon chains that contain only single bonds are called saturated fatty acids because they have the greatestnumber of hydrogen atoms possible and are, therefore, “saturated” with hydrogen. Fatty acids with hydrocarbonchains containing at least one double bond are called unsaturated fatty acids because they have fewer hydrogenatoms. Saturated fatty acids have a straight, flexible carbon backbone, whereas unsaturated fatty acids have “kinks”in their carbon skeleton because each double bond causes a rigid bend of the carbon skeleton. These differences insaturated versus unsaturated fatty acid structure result in different properties for the corresponding lipids in whichthe fatty acids are incorporated. For example, lipids containing saturated fatty acids are solids at room temperature,whereas lipids containing unsaturated fatty acids are liquids.A triacylglycerol, or triglyceride, is formed when three fatty acids are chemically linked to a glycerol molecule(Figure 7.12). Triglycerides are the primary components of adipose tissue (body fat), and are major constituentsof sebum (skin oils). They play an important metabolic role, serving as efficient energy-storage molecules that canprovide more than double the caloric content of both carbohydrates and proteins.Figure 7.12 Triglycerides are composed of a glycerol molecule attached to three fatty acids by a dehydrationsynthesis reaction.296 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain why fatty acids with hydrocarbon chains that contain only single bonds are called saturated fattyacids.Phospholipids and Biological MembranesTriglycerides are classified as simple lipids because they are formed from just two types of compounds: glycerol andfatty acids. In contrast, complex lipids contain at least one additional component, for example, a phosphate group(phospholipids) or a carbohydrate moiety (glycolipids). Figure 7.13 depicts a typical phospholipid composed oftwo fatty acids linked to glycerol (a diglyceride). The two fatty acid carbon chains may be both saturated, bothunsaturated, or one of each. Instead of another fatty acid molecule (as for triglycerides), the third binding position onthe glycerol molecule is occupied by a modified phosphate group.Figure 7.13 This illustration shows a phospholipid with two different fatty acids, one saturated and one unsaturated,bonded to the glycerol molecule. The unsaturated fatty acid has a slight kink in its structure due to the double bond.The molecular structure of lipids results in unique behavior in aqueous environments. Figure 7.12 depicts thestructure of a triglyceride. Because all three substituents on the glycerol backbone are long hydrocarbon chains, thesecompounds are nonpolar and not significantly attracted to polar water molecules—they are hydrophobic. Conversely,phospholipids such as the one shown in Figure 7.13 have a negatively charged phosphate group. Because thephosphate is charged, it is capable of strong attraction to water molecules and thus is hydrophilic, or “water loving.”The hydrophilic portion of the phospholipid is often referred to as a polar “head,” and the long hydrocarbon chains asnonpolar “tails.” A molecule presenting a hydrophobic portion and a hydrophilic moiety is said to be amphipathic.Notice the “R” designation within the hydrophilic head depicted in Figure 7.13, indicating that a polar head groupcan be more complex than a simple phosphate moiety. Glycolipids are examples in which carbohydrates are bondedto the lipids’ head groups.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 297The amphipathic nature of phospholipids enables them to form uniquely functional structures in aqueousenvironments. As mentioned, the polar heads of these molecules are strongly attracted to water molecules, andthe nonpolar tails are not. Because of their considerable lengths, these tails are, in fact, strongly attracted to oneanother. As a result, energetically stable, large-scale assemblies of phospholipid molecules are formed in whichthe hydrophobic tails congregate within enclosed regions, shielded from contact with water by the polar heads(Figure 7.14). The simplest of these structures are micelles, spherical assemblies containing a hydrophobic interiorof phospholipid tails and an outer surface of polar head groups. Larger and more complex structures are created fromlipid-bilayer sheets, or unit membranes, which are large, two-dimensional assemblies of phospholipids congregatedtail to tail. The cell membranes of nearly all organisms are made from lipid-bilayer sheets, as are the membranesof many intracellular components. These sheets may also form lipid-bilayer spheres that are the structural basis ofvesicles and liposomes, subcellular components that play a role in numerous physiological functions.Figure 7.14 Phospholipids tend to arrange themselves in aqueous solution forming liposomes, micelles, or lipidbilayer sheets. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)• How is the amphipathic nature of phospholipids significant?Isoprenoids and SterolsThe isoprenoids are branched lipids, also referred to as terpenoids, that are formed by chemical modifications ofthe isoprene molecule (Figure 7.15). These lipids play a wide variety of physiological roles in plants and animals,with many technological uses as pharmaceuticals (capsaicin), pigments (e.g., orange beta carotene, xanthophylls),and fragrances (e.g., menthol, camphor, limonene [lemon fragrance], and pinene [pine fragrance]). Long-chainisoprenoids are also found in hydrophobic oils and waxes. Waxes are typically water resistant and hard at roomtemperature, but they soften when heated and liquefy if warmed adequately. In humans, the main wax productionoccurs within the sebaceous glands of hair follicles in the skin, resulting in a secreted material called sebum,which consists mainly of triacylglycerol, wax esters, and the hydrocarbon squalene. There are many bacteria inthe microbiota on the skin that feed on these lipids. One of the most prominent bacteria that feed on lipids isPropionibacterium acnes, which uses the skin’s lipids to generate short-chain fatty acids and is involved in theproduction of acne.298 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.15 Five-carbon isoprene molecules are chemically modified in various ways to yield isoprenoids.Another type of lipids are steroids, complex, ringed structures that are found in cell membranes; some function ashormones. The most common types of steroids are sterols, which are steroids containing an OH group. These aremainly hydrophobic molecules, but also have hydrophilic hydroxyl groups. The most common sterol found in animaltissues is cholesterol. Its structure consists of four rings with a double bond in one of the rings, and a hydroxyl group atthe sterol-defining position. The function of cholesterol is to strengthen cell membranes in eukaryotes and in bacteriawithout cell walls, such as Mycoplasma. Prokaryotes generally do not produce cholesterol, although bacteria producesimilar compounds called hopanoids, which are also multiringed structures that strengthen bacterial membranes(Figure 7.16). Fungi and some protozoa produce a similar compound called ergosterol, which strengthens the cellmembranes of these organisms.Figure 7.16 Cholesterol and hopene (a hopanoid compound) are molecules that reinforce the structure of the cellmembranes in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, respectively.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 299LiposomesThis video (https://openstax.org/l/22liposomes) provides additionalinformation about phospholipids and liposomes.• How are isoprenoids used in technology?Part 2The moisturizing cream prescribed by Penny’s doctor was a topical corticosteroid cream containinghydrocortisone. Hydrocortisone is a synthetic form of cortisol, a corticosteroid hormone produced in the adrenalglands, from cholesterol. When applied directly to the skin, it can reduce inflammation and temporarily relieveminor skin irritations, itching, and rashes by reducing the secretion of histamine, a compound producedby cells of the immune system in response to the presence of pathogens or other foreign substances.Because histamine triggers the body’s inflammatory response, the ability of hydrocortisone to reduce the localproduction of histamine in the skin effectively suppresses the immune system and helps limit inflammation andaccompanying symptoms such as pruritus (itching) and rashes.• Does the corticosteroid cream treat the cause of Penny’s rash, or just the symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.7.4 ProteinsLearning Objectives• Describe the fundamental structure of an amino acid• Describe the chemical structures of proteins• Summarize the unique characteristics of proteinsAt the beginning of this chapter, a famous experiment was described in which scientists synthesized amino acidsunder conditions simulating those present on earth long before the evolution of life as we know it. These compoundsare capable of bonding together in essentially any number, yielding molecules of essentially any size that possess awide array of physical and chemical properties and perform numerous functions vital to all organisms. The moleculesderived from amino acids can function as structural components of cells and subcellular entities, as sources ofnutrients, as atom- and energy-storage reservoirs, and as functional species such as hormones, enzymes, receptors,and transport molecules.Link to LearningClinical Focus300 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Amino Acids and Peptide BondsAn amino acid is an organic molecule in which a hydrogen atom, a carboxyl group (–COOH), and an amino group(–NH2) are all bonded to the same carbon atom, the so-called α carbon. The fourth group bonded to the α carbonvaries among the different amino acids and is called a residue or a side chain, represented in structural formulas bythe letter R. A residue is a monomer that results when two or more amino acids combine and remove water molecules.The primary structure of a protein, a peptide chain, is made of amino acid residues. The unique characteristics of thefunctional groups and R groups allow these components of the amino acids to form hydrogen, ionic, and disulfidebonds, along with polar/nonpolar interactions needed to form secondary, tertiary, and quaternary protein structures.These groups are composed primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur, in the form of hydrocarbons,acids, amides, alcohols, and amines. A few examples illustrating these possibilities are provided in Figure 7.17.Figure 7.17Amino acids may chemically bond together by reaction of the carboxylic acid group of one molecule with theamine group of another. This reaction forms a peptide bond and a water molecule and is another example ofdehydration synthesis (Figure 7.18). Molecules formed by chemically linking relatively modest numbers of aminoacids (approximately 50 or fewer) are called peptides, and prefixes are often used to specify these numbers: dipeptides(two amino acids), tripeptides (three amino acids), and so forth. More generally, the approximate number of aminoacids is designated: oligopeptides are formed by joining up to approximately 20 amino acids, whereas polypeptidesare synthesized from up to approximately 50 amino acids. When the number of amino acids linked together becomesvery large, or when multiple polypeptides are used as building subunits, the macromolecules that result are calledproteins. The continuously variable length (the number of monomers) of these biopolymers, along with the varietyof possible R groups on each amino acid, allows for a nearly unlimited diversity in the types of proteins that may beformed.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 301Figure 7.18 Peptide bond formation is a dehydration synthesis reaction. The carboxyl group of the first amino acid(alanine) is linked to the amino group of the incoming second amino acid (alanine). In the process, a molecule ofwater is released.• How many amino acids are in polypeptides?Protein StructureThe size (length) and specific amino acid sequence of a protein are major determinants of its shape, and the shape ofa protein is critical to its function. For example, in the process of biological nitrogen fixation (see BiogeochemicalCycles), soil microorganisms collectively known as rhizobia symbiotically interact with roots of legume plants suchas soybeans, peanuts, or beans to form a novel structure called a nodule on the plant roots. The plant then producesa carrier protein called leghemoglobin, a protein that carries nitrogen or oxygen. Leghemoglobin binds with a veryhigh affinity to its substrate oxygen at a specific region of the protein where the shape and amino acid sequenceare appropriate (the active site). If the shape or chemical environment of the active site is altered, even slightly, thesubstrate may not be able to bind as strongly, or it may not bind at all. Thus, for the protein to be fully active, it musthave the appropriate shape for its function.Protein structure is categorized in terms of four levels: primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary. The primarystructure is simply the sequence of amino acids that make up the polypeptide chain. Figure 7.19 depicts the primarystructure of a protein.The chain of amino acids that defines a protein’s primary structure is not rigid, but instead is flexible because ofthe nature of the bonds that hold the amino acids together. When the chain is sufficiently long, hydrogen bondingmay occur between amine and carbonyl functional groups within the peptide backbone (excluding the R side group),resulting in localized folding of the polypeptide chain into helices and sheets. These shapes constitute a protein’ssecondary structure. The most common secondary structures are the α-helix and β-pleated sheet. In the α-helixstructure, the helix is held by hydrogen bonds between the oxygen atom in a carbonyl group of one amino acid and thehydrogen atom of the amino group that is just four amino acid units farther along the chain. In the β-pleated sheet,the pleats are formed by similar hydrogen bonds between continuous sequences of carbonyl and amino groups thatare further separated on the backbone of the polypeptide chain (Figure 7.20).The next level of protein organization is the tertiary structure, which is the large-scale three-dimensional shape ofa single polypeptide chain. Tertiary structure is determined by interactions between amino acid residues that are farapart in the chain. A variety of interactions give rise to protein tertiary structure, such as disulfide bridges, which arebonds between the sulfhydryl (–SH) functional groups on amino acid side groups; hydrogen bonds; ionic bonds; andhydrophobic interactions between nonpolar side chains. All these interactions, weak and strong, combine to determinethe final three-dimensional shape of the protein and its function (Figure 7.21).The process by which a polypeptide chain assumes a large-scale, three-dimensional shape is called protein folding.Folded proteins that are fully functional in their normal biological role are said to possess a native structure. When302 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5a protein loses its three-dimensional shape, it may no longer be functional. These unfolded proteins are denatured.Denaturation implies the loss of the secondary structure and tertiary structure (and, if present, the quaternarystructure) without the loss of the primary structure.Some proteins are assemblies of several separate polypeptides, also known as protein subunits. These proteinsfunction adequately only when all subunits are present and appropriately configured. The interactions that hold thesesubunits together constitute the quaternary structure of the protein. The overall quaternary structure is stabilized byrelatively weak interactions. Hemoglobin, for example, has a quaternary structure of four globular protein subunits:two α and two β polypeptides, each one containing an iron-based heme (Figure 7.22).Another important class of proteins is the conjugated proteins that have a nonprotein portion. If the conjugatedprotein has a carbohydrate attached, it is called a glycoprotein. If it has a lipid attached, it is called a lipoprotein.These proteins are important components of membranes. Figure 7.23 summarizes the four levels of proteinstructure.Figure 7.19 The primary structure of a protein is the sequence of amino acids. (credit: modification of work byNational Human Genome Research Institute)Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 303Figure 7.20 The secondary structure of a protein may be an α-helix or a β-pleated sheet, or both.Figure 7.21 The tertiary structure of proteins is determined by a variety of attractive forces, including hydrophobicinteractions, ionic bonding, hydrogen bonding, and disulfide linkages.304 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.22 A hemoglobin molecule has two α and two β polypeptides together with four heme groups.Figure 7.23 Protein structure has four levels of organization. (credit: modification of work by National HumanGenome Research Institute)• What can happen if a protein’s primary, secondary, tertiary, or quaternary structure is changed?Primary Structure, Dysfunctional Proteins, and Cystic FibrosisProteins associated with biological membranes are classified as extrinsic or intrinsic. Extrinsic proteins, alsocalled peripheral proteins, are loosely associated with one side of the membrane. Intrinsic proteins, or integralproteins, are embedded in the membrane and often function as part of transport systems as transmembraneMicro ConnectionsChapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 305proteins. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a human genetic disorder caused by a change in the transmembrane protein.It affects mostly the lungs but may also affect the pancreas, liver, kidneys, and intestine. CF is caused by aloss of the amino acid phenylalanine in a cystic fibrosis transmembrane protein (CFTR). The loss of one aminoacid changes the primary structure of a protein that normally helps transport salt and water in and out of cells(Figure 7.24).The change in the primary structure prevents the protein from functioning properly, which causes the body toproduce unusually thick mucus that clogs the lungs and leads to the accumulation of sticky mucus. The mucusobstructs the pancreas and stops natural enzymes from helping the body break down food and absorb vitalnutrients.In the lungs of individuals with cystic fibrosis, the altered mucus provides an environment where bacteria canthrive. This colonization leads to the formation of biofilms in the small airways of the lungs. The most commonpathogens found in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis are Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Figure 7.25) andBurkholderia cepacia. Pseudomonas differentiates within the biofilm in the lung and forms large colonies,called “mucoid” Pseudomonas. The colonies have a unique pigmentation that shows up in laboratory tests(Figure 7.25) and provides physicians with the first clue that the patient has CF (such colonies are rare inhealthy individuals).Figure 7.24 The normal CFTR protein is a channel protein that helps salt (sodium chloride) move in and outof cells.306 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.25 (a) A scanning electron micrograph shows the opportunistic bacterium Pseudomonasaeruginosa. (b) Pigment-producing P. aeruginosa on cetrimide agar shows the green pigment calledpyocyanin. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)For more information about cystic fibrosis, visit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation(https://openstax.org/l/22cystfibrofoun) website.7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify MicroorganismsLearning Objectives• Describe examples of biosynthesis products within a cell that can be detected to identify bacteriaAccurate identification of bacterial isolates is essential in a clinical microbiology laboratory because the results ofteninform decisions about treatment that directly affect patient outcomes. For example, cases of food poisoning requireaccurate identification of the causative agent so that physicians can prescribe appropriate treatment. Likewise, it isimportant to accurately identify the causative pathogen during an outbreak of disease so that appropriate strategiescan be employed to contain the epidemic.There are many ways to detect, characterize, and identify microorganisms. Some methods rely on phenotypicbiochemical characteristics, while others use genotypic identification. The biochemical characteristics of a bacteriumprovide many traits that are useful for classification and identification. Analyzing the nutritional and metaboliccapabilities of the bacterial isolate is a common approach for determining the genus and the species of the bacterium.Some of the most important metabolic pathways that bacteria use to survive will be discussed in MicrobialMetabolism. In this section, we will discuss a few methods that use biochemical characteristics to identifymicroorganisms.Some microorganisms store certain compounds as granules within their cytoplasm, and the contents of these granulescan be used for identification purposes. For example, poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) is a carbon- and energy-storageLink to LearningChapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 307compound found in some nonfluorescent bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas. Different species within this genus canbe classified by the presence or the absence of PHB and fluorescent pigments. The human pathogen P. aeruginosaand the plant pathogen P. syringae are two examples of fluorescent Pseudomonas species that do not accumulate PHBgranules.Other systems rely on biochemical characteristics to identify microorganisms by their biochemical reactions, suchas carbon utilization and other metabolic tests. In small laboratory settings or in teaching laboratories, thoseassays are carried out using a limited number of test tubes. However, more modern systems, such as the onedeveloped by Biolog, Inc., are based on panels of biochemical reactions performed simultaneously and analyzedby software. Biolog’s system identifies cells based on their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals and on theirphysiological properties, including pH and chemical sensitivity. It uses all major classes of biochemicals in itsanalysis. Identifications can be performed manually or with the semi- or fully automated instruments.Another automated system identifies microorganisms by determining the specimen’s mass spectrum and thencomparing it to a database that contains known mass spectra for thousands of microorganisms. This method is basedon matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) and uses disposableMALDI plates on which the microorganism is mixed with a specialized matrix reagent (Figure 7.26). The sample/reagent mixture is irradiated with a high-intensity pulsed ultraviolet laser, resulting in the ejection of gaseousions generated from the various chemical constituents of the microorganism. These gaseous ions are collected andaccelerated through the mass spectrometer, with ions traveling at a velocity determined by their mass-to-charge ratio(m/z), thus, reaching the detector at different times. A plot of detector signal versus m/z yields a mass spectrum forthe organism that is uniquely related to its biochemical composition. Comparison of the mass spectrum to a library ofreference spectra obtained from identical analyses of known microorganisms permits identification of the unknownmicrobe.Figure 7.26 MALDI-TOF methods are now routinely used for diagnostic procedures in clinical microbiologylaboratories. This technology is able to rapidly identify some microorganisms that cannot be readily identified by moretraditional methods. (credit “MALDI plate photo”: modification of work by Chen Q, Liu T, Chen G; credit “graphs”:modification of work by Bailes J, Vidal L, Ivanov DA, Soloviev M)Microbes can also be identified by measuring their unique lipid profiles. As we have learned, fatty acids of lipidscan vary in chain length, presence or absence of double bonds, and number of double bonds, hydroxyl groups,branches, and rings. To identify a microbe by its lipid composition, the fatty acids present in their membranesare analyzed. A common biochemical analysis used for this purpose is a technique used in clinical, public health,and food laboratories. It relies on detecting unique differences in fatty acids and is called fatty acid methyl ester(FAME) analysis. In a FAME analysis, fatty acids are extracted from the membranes of microorganisms, chemicallyaltered to form volatile methyl esters, and analyzed by gas chromatography (GC). The resulting GC chromatogram iscompared with reference chromatograms in a database containing data for thousands of bacterial isolates to identifythe unknown microorganism (Figure 7.27).308 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 7.27 Fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis in bacterial identification results in a chromatogram unique toeach bacterium. Each peak in the gas chromatogram corresponds to a particular fatty acid methyl ester and its heightis proportional to the amount present in the cell. (credit “culture”: modification of work by the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention; credit “graph”: modification of work by Zhang P. and Liu P.)A related method for microorganism identification is called phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA) analysis.Membranes are mostly composed of phospholipids, which can be saponified (hydrolyzed with alkali) to release thefatty acids. The resulting fatty acid mixture is then subjected to FAME analysis, and the measured lipid profiles canbe compared with those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism.Bacterial identification can also be based on the proteins produced under specific growth conditions within the humanbody. These types of identification procedures are called proteomic analysis. To perform proteomic analysis, proteinsfrom the pathogen are first separated by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), and the collected fractions arethen digested to yield smaller peptide fragments. These peptides are identified by mass spectrometry and comparedwith those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism in the original specimen.Microorganisms can also be identified by the carbohydrates attached to proteins (glycoproteins) in the plasmamembrane or cell wall. Antibodies and other carbohydrate-binding proteins can attach to specific carbohydrates oncell surfaces, causing the cells to clump together. Serological tests (e.g., the Lancefield groups tests, which are usedfor identification of Streptococcus species) are performed to detect the unique carbohydrates located on the surface ofthe cell.ResolutionPenny stopped using her new sunscreen and applied the corticosteroid cream to her rash as directed.However, after several days, her rash had not improved and actually seemed to be getting worse. She madea follow-up appointment with her doctor, who observed a bumpy red rash and pus-filled blisters around hairfollicles (Figure 7.28). The rash was especially concentrated in areas that would have been covered by aswimsuit. After some questioning, Penny told the physician that she had recently attended a pool party andspent some time in a hot tub. In light of this new information, the doctor suspected a case of hot tub rash, aninfection frequently caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that canthrive in hot tubs and swimming pools, especially when the water is not sufficiently chlorinated. P. aeruginosais the same bacterium that is associated with infections in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis.The doctor collected a specimen from Penny’s rash to be sent to the clinical microbiology lab. Confirmatorytests were carried out to distinguish P. aeruginosa from enteric pathogens that can also be present in pool andhot-tub water. The test included the production of the blue-green pigment pyocyanin on cetrimide agar andClinical FocusChapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 309growth at 42 °C. Cetrimide is a selective agent that inhibits the growth of other species of microbial flora andalso enhances the production of P. aeruginosa pigments pyocyanin and fluorescein, which are a characteristicblue-green and yellow-green, respectively.Tests confirmed the presence of P. aeruginosa in Penny’s skin sample, but the doctor decided not to prescribean antibiotic. Even though P. aeruginosa is a bacterium, Pseudomonas species are generally resistant to manyantibiotics. Luckily, skin infections like Penny’s are usually self-limiting; the rash typically lasts about 2 weeksand resolves on its own, with or without medical treatment. The doctor advised Penny to wait it out and keepusing the corticosteroid cream. The cream will not kill the P. aeruginosa on Penny’s skin, but it should calm herrash and minimize the itching by suppressing her body’s inflammatory response to the bacteria.Figure 7.28 Exposure to Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the water of a pool or hot tub can sometimes cause askin infection that manifests as “hot tub rash.” (credit: modification of work by “Lsupellmel”/WikimediaCommons)Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary7.1 Organic Molecules• The most abundant elements in cells are hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur.• Life is carbon based. Each carbon atom can bind to another one producing a carbon skeleton that can bestraight, branched, or ring shaped.• The same numbers and types of atoms may bond together in different ways to yield different moleculescalled isomers. Isomers may differ in the bonding sequence of their atoms (structural isomers) or in thespatial arrangement of atoms whose bonding sequences are the same (stereoisomers), and their physical andchemical properties may vary slightly or drastically.• Functional groups confer specific chemical properties to molecules bearing them. Common functionalgroups in biomolecules are hydroxyl, methyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, phosphate, and sulfhydryl.• Macromolecules are polymers assembled from individual units, the monomers, which bind together likebuilding blocks. Many biologically significant macromolecules are formed by dehydration synthesis, aprocess in which monomers bind together by combining their functional groups and generating watermolecules as byproducts.7.2 Carbohydrates• Carbohydrates, the most abundant biomolecules on earth, are widely used by organisms for structural andenergy-storage purposes.• Carbohydrates include individual sugar molecules (monosaccharides) as well as two or more moleculeschemically linked by glycosidic bonds. Monosaccharides are classified based on the number of carbons the310 Chapter 7 | Microbial BiochemistryThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5molecule as trioses (3 C), tetroses (4 C), pentoses (5 C), and hexoses (6 C). They are the building blocks forthe synthesis of polymers or complex carbohydrates.• Disaccharides such as sucrose, lactose, and maltose are molecules composed of two monosaccharides linkedtogether by a glycosidic bond.• Polysaccharides, or glycans, are polymers composed of hundreds of monosaccharide monomers linkedtogether by glycosidic bonds. The energy-storage polymers starch and glycogen are examples ofpolysaccharides and are all composed of branched chains of glucose molecules.• The polysaccharide cellulose is a common structural component of the cell walls of organisms. Otherstructural polysaccharides, such as N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) and N-acetyl muramic acid (NAM),incorporate modified glucose molecules and are used in the construction of peptidoglycan or chitin.7.3 Lipids• Lipids are composed mainly of carbon and hydrogen, but they can also contain oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur,and phosphorous. They provide nutrients for organisms, store carbon and energy, play structural roles inmembranes, and function as hormones, pharmaceuticals, fragrances, and pigments.• Fatty acids are long-chain hydrocarbons with a carboxylic acid functional group. Their relatively longnonpolar hydrocarbon chains make them hydrophobic. Fatty acids with no double bonds are saturated; thosewith double bonds are unsaturated.• Fatty acids chemically bond to glycerol to form structurally essential lipids such as triglycerides andphospholipids. Triglycerides comprise three fatty acids bonded to glycerol, yielding a hydrophobic molecule.Phospholipids contain both hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains and polar head groups, making themamphipathic and capable of forming uniquely functional large scale structures.• Biological membranes are large-scale structures based on phospholipid bilayers that provide hydrophilicexterior and interior surfaces suitable for aqueous environments, separated by an intervening hydrophobiclayer. These bilayers are the structural basis for cell membranes in most organisms, as well as subcellularcomponents such as vesicles.• Isoprenoids are lipids derived from isoprene molecules that have many physiological roles and a variety ofcommercial applications.• A wax is a long-chain isoprenoid that is typically water resistant; an example of a wax-containing substanceis sebum, produced by sebaceous glands in the skin. Steroids are lipids with complex, ringed structures thatfunction as structural components of cell membranes and as hormones. Sterols are a subclass of steroidscontaining a hydroxyl group at a specific location on one of the molecule’s rings; one example is cholesterol.• Bacteria produce hopanoids, structurally similar to cholesterol, to strengthen bacterial membranes. Fungi andprotozoa produce a strengthening agent called ergosterol.7.4 Proteins• Amino acids are small molecules essential to all life. Each has an α carbon to which a hydrogen atom,carboxyl group, and amine group are bonded. The fourth bonded group, represented by R, varies in chemicalcomposition, size, polarity, and charge among different amino acids, providing variation in properties.• Peptides are polymers formed by the linkage of amino acids via dehydration synthesis. The bonds betweenthe linked amino acids are called peptide bonds. The number of amino acids linked together may vary froma few to many.• Proteins are polymers formed by the linkage of a very large number of amino acids. They perform manyimportant functions in a cell, serving as nutrients and enzymes; storage molecules for carbon, nitrogen, andenergy; and structural components.• The structure of a protein is a critical determinant of its function and is described by a graduated classification:primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary. The native structure of a protein may be disrupted bydenaturation, resulting in loss of its higher-order structure and its biological function.• Some proteins are formed by several separate protein subunits, the interaction of these subunits composingthe quaternary structure of the protein complex.Chapter 7 | Microbial Biochemistry 311• Conjugated proteins have a nonpolypeptide portion that can be a carbohydrate (forming a glycoprotein) ora lipid fraction (forming a lipoprotein). These proteins are important components of membranes.7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms• Accurate identification of bacteria is essential in a clinical laboratory for diagnostic and management ofepidemics, pandemics, and food poisoning caused by bacterial outbreaks.• The phenotypic identification of microorganisms involves using observable traits, including profiles ofstructural components such as lipids, biosynthetic products such as sugars or amino acids, or storagecompounds such as poly-β-hydroxybutyrate.• An unknown microbe may be identified from the unique mass spectrum produced when it is analyzed bymatrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF).• Microbes can be identified by determining their lipid compositions, using fatty acid methyl esters (FAME)or phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA) analysis.• Proteomic analysis, the study of all accumulated proteins of an organism; can also be used for bacterialidentification.• Glycoproteins in the plasma membrane or cell wall structures can bind to lectins or antibodies and can be used for identification.