Chapter 20Laboratory Analysis of theImmune ResponseFigure 20.1 Lab-on-a-chip technology allows immunological assays to be miniaturized so tests can be done rapidlywith minimum quantities of expensive reagents. The chips contain tiny flow tubes to allow movement of fluids bycapillary action, reactions sites with embedded reagents, and data output through electronic sensors. (credit:modification of work by Maggie Bartlett, NHGRI)Chapter Outline20.1 Polyclonal and Monoclonal Antibody Production20.2 Detecting Antigen-Antibody Complexes20.3 Agglutination Assays20.4 EIAs and ELISAs20.5 Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesIntroductionMany laboratory tests are designed to confirm a presumptive diagnosis by detecting antibodies specific to a suspectedpathogen. Unfortunately, many such tests are time-consuming and expensive. That is now changing, however,with the development of new, miniaturized technologies that are fast and inexpensive. For example, researchers atColumbia University are developing a “lab-on-a-chip” technology that will test a single drop of blood for 15 differentinfectious diseases, including HIV and syphilis, in a matter of minutes.[1] The blood is pulled through tiny capillariesinto reaction chambers where the patient’s antibodies mix with reagents. A chip reader that attaches to a cell phoneanalyzes the results and sends them to the patient’s healthcare provider. Currently the device is being field tested inRwanda to check pregnant women for chronic diseases. Researchers estimate that the chip readers will sell for about$100 and individual chips for $1.[2]1. Chin, Curtis D. et al., “Mobile Device for Disease Diagnosis and Data Tracking in Resource-Limited Settings,” Clinical Chemistry 59,no. 4 (2013): 629-40.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 85920.1 Polyclonal and Monoclonal Antibody ProductionLearning Objectives• Compare the method of development, use, and characteristics of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies• Explain the nature of antibody cross-reactivity and why this is less of a problem with monoclonal antibodiesIn addition to being crucial for our normal immune response, antibodies provide powerful tools for research anddiagnostic purposes. The high specificity of antibodies makes them an excellent tool for detecting and quantifying abroad array of targets, from drugs to serum proteins to microorganisms.With in vitro assays, antibodies can be used toprecipitate soluble antigens, agglutinate (clump) cells, opsonize and kill bacteria with the assistance of complement,and neutralize drugs, toxins, and viruses.An antibody’s specificity results from the antigen-binding site formed within the variable regions—regions of theantibody that have unique patterns of amino acids that can only bind to target antigens with a molecular sequencethat provides complementary charges and noncovalent bonds. There are limitations to antibody specificity, however.Some antigens are so chemically similar that cross-reactivity occurs; in other words, antibodies raised against oneantigen bind to a chemically similar but different antigen. Consider an antigen that consists of a single protein withmultiple epitopes (Figure 20.2). This single protein may stimulate the production of many different antibodies, someof which may bind to chemically identical epitopes on other proteins.Cross-reactivity is more likely to occur between antibodies and antigens that have low affinity or avidity. Affinity,which can be determined experimentally, is a measure of the binding strength between an antibody's binding siteand an epitope, whereas avidity is the total strength of all the interactions in an antibody-antigen complex (whichmay have more than one bonding site). Avidity is influenced by affinity as well as the structural arrangements of theepitope and the variable regions of the antibody. If an antibody has a high affinity/avidity for a specific antigen, it isless likely to cross-react with an antigen for which it has a lower affinity/avidity.Part 1In an unfortunate incident, a healthcare worker struggling with addiction was caught stealing syringes ofpainkillers and replacing them with syringes filled with unknown substances. The hospital immediately fired theemployee and had him arrested; however, two patients that he had worked with later tested positive for HIV.While there was no proof that the infections originated from the tainted syringes, the hospital’s public healthphysician took immediate steps to determine whether any other patients had been put at risk. Although theworker had only been employed for a short time, it was determined that he had come into contact with morethan 1300 patients. The hospital decided to contact all of these patients and have them tested for HIV.• Why does the hospital feel it is necessary to test every patient for HIV?• What types of tests can be used to determine if a patient has HIV?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus2. Evarts, H., “Fast, Low-Cost Device Uses the Cloud to Speed Up Testing for HIV and More,” January 24, 2013. Accessed July 14, 2016.http://engineering.columbia.edu/fast-low-cost-device-uses-cloud-speed-diagnostic-testing-hiv-and-more.860 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.2 An antibody binds to a specific region on an antigen called an epitope. A single antigen can havemultiple epitopes for different, specific antibodies.• What property makes antibodies useful for research and clinical diagnosis?• What is cross-reactivity and why does it occur?Producing Polyclonal AntibodiesAntibodies used for research and diagnostic purposes are often obtained by injecting a lab animal such as a rabbit or agoat with a specific antigen. Within a few weeks, the animal’s immune system will produce high levels of antibodiesspecific for the antigen. These antibodies can be harvested in an antiserum, which is whole serum collected from ananimal following exposure to an antigen. Because most antigens are complex structures with multiple epitopes, theyresult in the production of multiple antibodies in the lab animal. This so-called polyclonal antibody response is alsotypical of the response to infection by the human immune system. Antiserum drawn from an animal will thus containantibodies from multiple clones of B cells, with each B cell responding to a specific epitope on the antigen (Figure20.3).Lab animals are usually injected at least twice with antigen when being used to produce antiserum. The secondinjection will activate memory cells that make class IgG antibodies against the antigen. The memory cells alsoundergo affinity maturation, resulting in a pool of antibodies with higher average affinity. Affinity maturation occursbecause of mutations in the immunoglobulin gene variable regions, resulting in B cells with slightly altered antigenbindingsites. On re-exposure to the antigen, those B cells capable of producing antibody with higher affinity antigenbindingsites will be stimulated to proliferate and produce more antibody than their lower-affinity peers. An adjuvant,which is a chemical that provokes a generalized activation of the immune system that stimulates greater antibodyproduction, is often mixed with the antigen prior to injection.Antiserum obtained from animals will not only contain antibodies against the antigen artificially introduced in thelaboratory, but it will also contain antibodies to any other antigens to which the animal has been exposed during itslifetime. For this reason, antisera must first be “purified” to remove other antibodies before using the antibodies forresearch or diagnostic assays.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 861Figure 20.3 This diagram illustrates the process for harvesting polyclonal antibodies produced in response to anantigen.Clinical Uses of Polyclonal AntiseraPolyclonal antisera are used in many clinical tests that are designed to determine whether a patient is producingantibodies in response to a particular pathogen. While these tests are certainly powerful diagnostic tools, they havetheir limitations, because they are an indirect means of determining whether a particular pathogen is present. Testsbased on a polyclonal response can sometimes lead to a false-positive result—in other words, a test that confirmsthe presence of an antigen that is, in fact, not present. Antibody-based tests can also result in a false-negative result,which occurs when the test fails to detect an antibody that is, in fact, present.The accuracy of antibody tests can be described in terms of test sensitivity and test specificity. Test sensitivity isthe probability of getting a positive test result when the patient is indeed infected. If a test has high sensitivity, theprobability of a false negative is low. Test specificity, on the other hand, is the probability of getting a negative testresult when the patient is not infected. If a test has high specificity, the probability of a false positive is low.False positives often occur due to cross-reactivity, which can occur when epitopes from a different pathogen aresimilar to those found on the pathogen being tested for. For this reason, antibody-based tests are often used only asscreening tests; if the results are positive, other confirmatory tests are used to make sure that the results were not afalse positive.For example, a blood sample from a patient suspected of having hepatitis C can be screened for the virus usingantibodies that bind to antigens on hepatitis C virus. If the patient is indeed infected with hepatitis C virus, theantibodies will bind to the antigens, yielding a positive test result. If the patient is not infected with hepatitic C virus,the antibodies will generally not bind to anything and the test should be negative; however, a false positive mayoccur if the patient has been previously infected by any of a variety of pathogens that elicit antibodies that crossreactwith the hepatitis C virus antigens. Antibody tests for hepatitis C have high sensitivity (a low probability ofa false negative) but low specificity (a high probability of a false positive). Thus, patients who test positive musthave a second, confirmatory test to rule out the possibility of a false positive. The confirmatory test is a moreexpensive and time-consuming test that directly tests for the presence of hepatitis C viral RNA in the blood. Onlyafter the confirmatory test comes back positive can the patient be definitively diagnosed with a hepatitis C infection.Antibody-based tests can result in a false negative if, for any reason, the patient’s immune system has not produced862 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5detectable levels of antibodies. For some diseases, it may take several weeks following infection before the immunesystem produces enough antibodies to cross the detection threshold of the assay. In immunocompromised patients,the immune system may not be capable of producing a detectable level of antibodies.Another limitation of using antibody production as an indicator of disease is that antibodies in the blood will persistlong after the infection has been cleared. Depending on the type of infection, antibodies will be present for manymonths; sometimes, they may be present for the remainder of the patient’s life. Thus, a positive antibody-based testonly means that the patient was infected at some point in time; it does not prove that the infection is active.In addition to their role in diagnosis, polyclonal antisera can activate complement, detect the presence of bacteria inclinical and food industry settings, and perform a wide array of precipitation reactions that can detect and quantifyserum proteins, viruses, or other antigens. However, with the many specificities of antibody present in a polyclonalantiserum, there is a significant likelihood that the antiserum will cross-react with antigens to which the individualwas never exposed. Therefore, we must always account for the possibility of false-positive results when working witha polyclonal antiserum.• What is a false positive and what are some reasons that false positives occur?• What is a false negative and what are some reasons that false positives occur?• If a patient tests negative on a highly sensitive test, what is the likelihood that the person is infected with thepathogen?Producing Monoclonal AntibodiesSome types of assays require better antibody specificity and affinity than can be obtained using a polyclonalantiserum. To attain this high specificity, all of the antibodies must bind with high affinity to a single epitope. Thishigh specificity can be provided by monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Table 20.1 compares some of the importantcharacteristics of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies.Unlike polyclonal antibodies, which are produced in live animals, monoclonal antibodies are produced in vitro usingtissue-culture techniques. mAbs are produced by immunizing an animal, often a mouse, multiple times with a specificantigen. B cells from the spleen of the immunized animal are then removed. Since normal B cells are unable toproliferate forever, they are fused with immortal, cancerous B cells called myeloma cells, to yield hybridoma cells.All of the cells are then placed in a selective medium that allows only the hybridomas to grow; unfused myeloma cellscannot grow, and any unfused B cells die off. The hybridomas, which are capable of growing continuously in culturewhile producing antibodies, are then screened for the desired mAb. Those producing the desired mAb are grown intissue culture; the culture medium is harvested periodically and mAbs are purified from the medium. This is a veryexpensive and time-consuming process. It may take weeks of culturing and many liters of media to provide enoughmAbs for an experiment or to treat a single patient. mAbs are expensive (Figure 20.4).Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 863Figure 20.4 Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are produced by introducing an antigen to a mouse and then fusingpolyclonal B cells from the mouse’s spleen to myeloma cells. The resulting hybridoma cells are cultured and continueto produce antibodies to the antigen. Hybridomas producing the desired mAb are then grown in large numbers on aselective medium that is periodically harvested to obtain the desired mAbs.Characteristics of Polyclonal and Monoclonal AntibodiesMonoclonal Antibodies Polyclonal AntibodiesExpensive production Inexpensive productionLong production time Rapid productionLarge quantities of specific antibodies Large quantities of nonspecific antibodiesRecognize a single epitope on an antigen Recognize multiple epitopes on an antigenProduction is continuous and uniform once the hybridoma is made Different batches vary in compositionTable 20.1864 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Clinical Uses of Monoclonal AntibodiesSince the most common methods for producing monoclonal antibodies use mouse cells, it is necessary to createhumanized monoclonal antibodies for human clinical use. Mouse antibodies cannot be injected repeatedly intohumans, because the immune system will recognize them as being foreign and will respond to them with neutralizingantibodies. This problem can be minimized by genetically engineering the antibody in the mouse B cell. The variableregions of the mouse light and heavy chain genes are ligated to human constant regions, and the chimeric gene is thentransferred into a host cell. This allows production of a mAb that is mostly “human” with only the antigen-bindingsite being of mouse origin.Humanized mAbs have been successfully used to treat cancer with minimal side effects. For example, the humanizedmonoclonal antibody drug Herceptin has been helpful for the treatment of some types of breast cancer. There havealso been a few preliminary trials of humanized mAb for the treatment of infectious diseases, but none of thesetreatments are currently in use. In some cases, mAbs have proven too specific to treat infectious diseases, becausethey recognize some serovars of a pathogen but not others. Using a cocktail of multiple mAbs that target differentstrains of the pathogen can address this problem. However, the great cost associated with mAb production is anotherchallenge that has prevented mAbs from becoming practical for use in treating microbial infections.[3]One promising technology for inexpensive mAbs is the use of genetically engineered plants to produce antibodies (orplantibodies). This technology transforms plant cells into antibody factories rather than relying on tissue culture cells,which are expensive and technically demanding. In some cases, it may even be possible to deliver these antibodies byhaving patients eat the plants rather than by extracting and injecting the antibodies. For example, in 2013, a researchgroup cloned antibody genes into plants that had the ability to neutralize an important toxin from bacteria that cancause severe gastrointestinal disease.[4] Eating the plants could potentially deliver the antibodies directly to the toxin.• How are humanized monoclonal antibodies produced?• What does the “monoclonal” of monoclonal antibodies mean?Using Monoclonal Antibodies to Combat EbolaDuring the 2014–2015 Ebola outbreak in West Africa, a few Ebola-infected patients were treated with ZMapp,a drug that had been shown to be effective in trials done in rhesus macaques only a few months before.[5]ZMapp is a combination of three mAbs produced by incorporating the antibody genes into tobacco plants usinga viral vector. By using three mAbs, the drug is effective across multiple strains of the virus. Unfortunately,there was only enough ZMapp to treat a tiny number of patients.While the current technology is not adequate for producing large quantities of ZMapp, it does show thatplantibodies—plant-produced mAbs—are feasible for clinical use, potentially cost effective, and worth furtherdevelopment. The last several years have seen an explosion in the number of new mAb-based drugs for thetreatment of cancer and infectious diseases; however, the widespread use of such drugs is currently inhibitedby their exorbitant cost, especially in underdeveloped parts of the world, where a single dose might cost morethan the patient’s lifetime income. Developing methods for cloning antibody genes into plants could reduceMicro Connections3. Saylor, Carolyn, Ekaterina Dadachova and Arturo Casadevall, “Monoclonal Antibody-Based Therapies for Microbial Diseases,” Vaccine27 (2009): G38-G46.4. Nakanishi, Katsuhiro et al., “Production of Hybrid-IgG/IgA Plantibodies with Neutralizing Activity against Shiga Toxin 1,” PloS One 8,no. 11 (2013): e80712.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 865costs dramatically.20.2 Detecting Antigen-Antibody ComplexesLearning Objectives• Describe various types of assays used to find antigen-antibody complexes• Describe the circumstances under which antigen-antibody complexes precipitate out of solution• Explain how antibodies in patient serum can be used to diagnose diseaseLaboratory tests to detect antibodies and antigens outside of the body (e.g., in a test tube) are called in vitro assays.When both antibodies and their corresponding antigens are present in a solution, we can often observe a precipitationreaction in which large complexes (lattices) form and settle out of solution. In the next several sections, we willdiscuss several common in vitro assays.Precipitin ReactionsA visible antigen-antibody complex is called a precipitin, and in vitro assays that produce a precipitin are calledprecipitin reactions. A precipitin reaction typically involves adding soluble antigens to a test tube containing asolution of antibodies. Each antibody has two arms, each of which can bind to an epitope. When an antibody binds totwo antigens, the two antigens become bound together by the antibody. A lattice can form as antibodies bind more andmore antigens together, resulting in a precipitin (Figure 20.5). Most precipitin tests use a polyclonal antiserum ratherthan monoclonal antibodies because polyclonal antibodies can bind to multiple epitopes, making lattice formationmore likely. Although mAbs may bind some antigens, the binding will occur less often, making it much less likelythat a visible precipitin will form.Figure 20.5 Polyclonal antiserum binds to multiple epitopes on an antigen, leading to lattice formation that results ina visible precipitin. Monoclonal antibodies can only bind to a single epitope; therefore, less binding occurs and latticeformation generally does not occur.The amount of precipitation also depends on several other factors. For example, precipitation is enhanced when theantibodies have a high affinity for the antigen. While most antibodies bind antigen with high affinity, even highaffinitybinding uses relatively weak noncovalent bonds, so that individual interactions will often break and newinteractions will occur.In addition, for precipitin formation to be visible, there must be an optimal ratio of antibody to antigen. The optimal5. Qiu, Xiangguo et al., “Reversion of Advanced Ebola Virus Disease in Nonhuman Primates with ZMapp,” Nature 514 (2014): 47–53.866 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ratio is not likely to be a 1:1 antigen-to-antibody ratio; it can vary dramatically, depending on the number of epitopeson the antigen and the class of antibody. Some antigens may have only one or two epitopes recognized by theantiserum, whereas other antigens may have many different epitopes and/or multiple instances of the same epitope ona single antigen molecule.Figure 20.6 illustrates how the ratio of antigen and antibody affects the amount of precipitation. To achieve theoptimal ratio, antigen is slowly added to a solution containing antibodies, and the amount of precipitin is determinedqualitatively. Initially, there is not enough antigen to produce visible lattice formation; this is called the zone ofantibody excess. As more antigen is added, the reaction enters the equivalence zone (or zone of equivalence), whereboth the optimal antigen-antibody interaction and maximal precipitation occur. If even more antigen were added, theamount of antigen would become excessive and actually cause the amount of precipitation to decline.Figure 20.6 As antigen is slowly added to a solution containing a constant amount antibody, the amount of precipitinincreases as the antibody-to-antigen ratio approaches the equivalence zone and decreases once the proportion ofantigen exceeds the optimal ratio.• What is a precipitin?• Why do polyclonal antisera produce a better precipitin reaction?Precipitin Ring TestA variety of techniques allow us to use precipitin formation to quantify either antigen concentration or the amountof antibody present in an antiserum. One such technique is the precipitin ring test (Figure 20.7), which is used todetermine the relative amount of antigen-specific antibody in a sample of serum. To perform this test, a set of testtubes is prepared by adding an antigen solution to the bottom of each tube. Each tube receives the same volume ofsolution, and the concentration of antigens is constant (e.g., 1 mg/mL). Next, glycerol is added to the antigen solutionin each test tube, followed by a serial dilution of the antiserum. The glycerol prevents mixing of the antiserum withthe antigen solution, allowing antigen-antibody binding to take place only at the interface of the two solutions. Theresult is a visible ring of precipitin in the tubes that have an antigen-antibody ratio within the equivalence zone. ThisChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 867highest dilution with a visible ring is used to determine the titer of the antibodies. The titer is the reciprocal of thehighest dilution showing a positive result, expressed as a whole number. In Figure 20.7, the titer is 16.While a measurement of titer does not tell us in absolute terms how much antibody is present, it does give a measureof biological activity, which is often more important than absolute amount. In this example, it would not be usefulto know what mass of IgG were present in the antiserum, because there are many different specificities of antibodypresent; but it is important for us to know how much of the antibody activity in a patient’s serum is directed againstthe antigen of interest (e.g., a particular pathogen or allergen).Figure 20.7 A precipitin ring test is performed using a standard antigen solution in the bottom of the tube and aserial dilution of antiserum in the top of the tube. Glycerol prevents the two solutions from mixing so that precipitationonly occurs at the interface. A visible ring of precipitation is seen in the 1/4, 1/8, and 1/16 dilutions, indicating thatthese concentrations are within the equivalence zone. Since 1/16 is the highest dilution in which a precipitin isobserved, the titer is the reciprocal, or 16.Ouchterlony AssayWhile the precipitin ring test provides insights into antibody-antigen interactions, it also has some drawbacks.It requires the use of large amounts of serum, and great care must be taken to avoid mixing the solutions anddisrupting the ring. Performing a similar test in an agar gel matrix can minimize these problems. This type of assayis variously called double immunodiffusion or the Ouchterlony assay for Orjan Ouchterlony,[6] who first describedthe technique in 1948.When agar is highly purified, it produces a clear, colorless gel. Holes are punched in the gel to form wells, and antigenand antisera are added to neighboring wells. Proteins are able to diffuse through the gel, and precipitin arcs formbetween the wells at the zone of equivalence. Because the precipitin lattice is too large to diffuse through the gel, thearcs are firmly locked in place and easy to see (Figure 20.8).Although there are now more sensitive and quantitative methods of detecting antibody-antigen interactions, theOuchterlony test provides a rapid and qualitative way of determining whether an antiserum has antibodies againsta particular antigen. The Ouchterlony test is particularly useful when looking for cross-reactivity. We can check anantiserum against a group of closely related antigens and see which combinations form precipitin arcs.6. Ouchterlony, Örjan, “In Vitro Method for Testing the Toxin-Producing Capacity of Diphtheria Bacteria,” Acta PathologicaMicrobiologica Scandinavica 26, no. 4 (1949): 516-24.868 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.8 The Ouchterlony test places antigen (well A) and antisera (wells 1 through 5) in a gel. The antibodiesand antigen diffuse through the gel, causing a precipitin arc to form at the zone of equivalence. In this example, onlythe antiserum in well 1 contains antibodies to the antigen. The resulting precipitin arc is stable because the lattice istoo large to diffuse through the gel. (credit left: modification of work by Higgins PJ, Tong C, Borenfreund E, Okin RS,Bendich A)Radial Immunodiffusion AssayThe radial immunodiffusion (RID) assay is similar to the Ouchterlony assay but is used to precisely quantify antigenconcentration rather than to compare different antigens. In this assay, the antiserum is added to tempered agar (liquidagar at slightly above 45 °C), which is poured into a small petri dish or onto a glass slide and allowed to cool.Wells are cut in the cooled agar, and antigen is then added to the wells and allowed to diffuse. As the antigen andantibody interact, they form a zone of precipitation. The square of the diameter of the zone of precipitation is directlyproportional to the concentration of antigen. By measuring the zones of precipitation produced by samples of knownconcentration (see the outer ring of samples in Figure 20.9), we can prepare a standard curve for determining theconcentration of an unknown solution. The RID assay is a also useful test for determining the concentration of manyserum proteins such as the C3 and C4 complement proteins, among others.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 869Figure 20.9 In this radial immunodiffusion (RID) assay, an antiserum is mixed with the agar before it is cooled, andsolutions containing antigen are added to each well in increasing concentrations (wells 1–4). An antigen solution ofan unknown concentration is added to well 5. The zones of precipitation are measured and plotted against a standardcurve to determine the antigen concentration of the unknown sample. (credit circles: modification of work by KangwaM, Yelemane V, Polat AN, Gorrepati KD, Grasselli M, Fernández-Lahore M)• Why does a precipitin ring form in a precipitin ring test, and what are some reasons why a ring might notform?• Compare and contrast the techniques used in an Ouchterlony assay and a radial immunodiffusion assay.Flocculation AssaysA flocculation assay is similar to a precipitin reaction except that it involves insoluble antigens such as lipids. Aflocculant is similar to a precipitin in that there is a visible lattice of antigen and antibody, but because lipids areinsoluble in aqueous solution, they cannot precipitate. Instead of precipitation, flocculation (foaming) is observed inthe test tube fluid.Using Flocculation to Test for SyphilisSyphilis is a sexually transmitted infection that can cause severe, chronic disease in adults. In addition, itis readily passed from infected mothers to their newborns during pregnancy and childbirth, often resultingin stillbirth or serious long-term health problems for the infant. Unfortunately, syphilis can also be difficultto diagnose in expectant mothers, because it is often asymptomatic, especially in women. In addition, thecausative agent, the bacterium Treponema pallidum, is both difficult to grow on conventional lab media andtoo small to see using routine microcopy. For these reasons, presumptive diagnoses of syphilis are generallyconfirmed indirectly in the laboratory using tests that detect antibodies to treponemal antigens.In 1906, German scientist August von Wassermann (1866–1925) introduced the first test for syphilis that reliedMicro Connections870 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5on detecting anti-treponemal antibodies in the patient’s blood. The antibodies detected in the Wassermanntest were antiphospholipid antibodies that are nonspecific to T. pallidum. Their presence can assist in thediagnosis of syphilis, but because they are nonspecific, they can also lead to false-positive results in patientswith other diseases and autoimmune conditions. The original Wasserman test has been modified over theyears to minimize false-positives and is now known as the Venereal Disease Research Lab test, better knownby its acronym, the VDRL test.To perform the VDRL test, patient serum or cerebral spinal fluid is placed on a slide with a mixture ofcardiolipin (an antigenic phospholipid found in the mitochondrial membrane of various pathogens), lecithin,and cholesterol. The lecithin and cholesterol stabilize the reaction and diminish false positives. Anti-treponemalantibodies from an infected patient’s serum will bind cardiolipin and form a flocculant. Although the VDRL test ismore specific than the original Wassermann assay, false positives may still occur in patients with autoimmunediseases that cause extensive cell damage (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus).Neutralization AssayTo cause infection, viruses must bind to receptors on host cells. Antiviral antibodies can neutralize viral infectionsby coating the virions, blocking the binding (Figure 18.7). This activity neutralizes virions and can result in theformation of large antibody-virus complexes (which are readily removed by phagocytosis) or by antibody bindingto the virus and blocking its binding to host cell receptors. This neutralization activity is the basis of neutralizationassays, sensitive assays used for diagnoses of viral infections.When viruses infect cells, they often cause damage (cytopathic effects) that may include lysis of the host cells.Cytopathic effects can be visualized by growing host cells in a petri dish, covering the cells with a thin layer of agar,and then adding virus (see Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses). The virus will diffuse very slowlythrough the agar. A virus will enter a host cell, proliferate (causing cell damage), be released from the dead host cell,and then move to neighboring cells. As more and more cells die, plaques of dead cells will form (Figure 20.10).During the course of a viral infection, the patient will mount an antibody response to the virus, and we can quantifythose antibodies using a plaque reduction assay. To perform the assay, a serial dilution is carried out on a serumsample. Each dilution is then mixed with a standardized amount of the suspect virus. Any virus-specific antibodiesin the serum will neutralize some of the virus. The suspensions are then added to host cells in culture to allow anynonneutralized virus to infect the cells and form plaques after several days. The titer is defined as the reciprocal of thehighest dilution showing a 50% reduction in plaques. Titer is always expressed as a whole number. For example, if a1/64 dilution was the highest dilution to show 50% plaque reduction, then the titer is 64.The presence of antibodies in the patient’s serum does not tell us whether the patient is currently infected or wasinfected in the past. Current infections can be identified by waiting two weeks and testing another serum sample. Afour-fold increase in neutralizing titer in this second sample indicates a new infection.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 871Figure 20.10 In a neutralization assay, antibodies in patient serum neutralize viruses added to the wells, preventingthe formation of plaques. In the assay pictured, the wells with numerous plaques (white patches) contain a lowconcentration of antibodies. The wells with relatively few plaques have a high concentration of antibodies. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• In a neutralization assay, if a patient’s serum has high numbers of antiviral antibodies, would you expect tosee more or fewer plaques?ImmunoelectrophoresisWhen a patient has elevated protein levels in the blood or is losing protein in the urine, a clinician will often ordera polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) assay (see Visualizing and Characterizing DNA, RNA, andProtein). This assay compares the relative abundance of the various types of serum proteins. Abnormal proteinelectrophoresis patterns can be further studied using immunoelectrophoresis (IEP). The IEP begins by running aPAGE. Antisera against selected serum proteins are added to troughs running parallel to the electrophoresis track,forming precipitin arcs similar to those seen in an Ouchterlony assay (Figure 20.11). This allows the identificationof abnormal immunoglobulin proteins in the sample.IEP is particularly useful in the diagnosis of multiple myeloma, a cancer of antibody-secreting cells. Patients withmultiple myeloma cannot produce healthy antibodies; instead they produce abnormal antibodies that are monoclonalproteins (M proteins). Thus, patients with multiple myeloma will present with elevated serum protein levels that showa distinct band in the gamma globulin region of a protein electrophoresis gel and a sharp spike (in M protein) on thedensitometer scan rather than the normal broad smear (Figure 20.12). When antibodies against the various typesof antibody heavy and light chains are used to form precipitin arcs, the M protein will cause distinctly skewed arcsagainst one class of heavy chain and one class of light chain as seen in Figure 20.11.872 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.11 (a) This graph shows normal measurements of serum proteins. (b) This photograph shows animmunoelectrophoresis of urine. After electrophoresis, antisera were added to the troughs and the precipitin arcsformed, illustrating the distribution of specific proteins. The skewed arcs (arrows) help to diagnose multiple myeloma.(credit a, b: modification of work by Izawa S, Akimoto T, Ikeuchi H, Kusano E, Nagata D)Protein Electrophoresis and the Characterization of Immunoglobulin StructureThe advent of electrophoresis ultimately led to researching and understanding the structure of antibodies. WhenSwedish biochemist Arne Tiselius (1902–1971) published the first protein electrophoresis results in 1937,[7] he couldidentify the protein albumin (the smallest and most abundant serum protein) by the sharp band it produced in thegel. The other serum proteins could not be resolved in a simple protein electrophoresis, so he named the threebroad bands, with many proteins in each band, alpha, beta, and gamma globulins. Two years later, Americanimmunologist Elvin Kabat (1914–2000) traveled to Sweden to work with Tiselius using this new technique and showedthat antibodies migrated as gamma globulins.[8] With this new understanding in hand, researchers soon learnedthat multiple myeloma, because it is a cancer of antibody-secreting cells, could be tentatively diagnosed by thepresence of a large M spike in the gamma-globulin region by protein electrophoresis. Prior to this discovery, studieson immunoglobulin structure had been minimal, because of the difficulty of obtaining pure samples to study. Serafrom multiple myeloma patients proved to be an excellent source of highly enriched monoclonal immunoglobulin,providing the raw material for studies over the next 20-plus years that resulted in the elucidation of the structure ofimmunoglobulin.Micro Connections7. Tiselius, Arne, “Electrophoresis of Serum Globulin: Electrophoretic Analysis of Normal and Immune Sera,” Biochemical Journal 31, no.9 (1937): 1464.8. Tiselius, Arne and Elvin A. Kabat. “An Electrophoretic Study of Immune Sera and Purified Antibody Preparations,” The Journal ofExperimental Medicine 69, no. 1 (1939): 119-31.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 873Figure 20.12 Electrophoresis patterns of myeloma (right) and normal sera (left). The proteins have been stained;when the density of each band is quantified by densitometry, the data produce the bar graph on the right. Both gelsshow the expected dense band of albumin at the bottom and an abnormal spike in the gamma-globulin region.(credit: modification of work by Soodgupta D, Hurchla MA, Jiang M, Zheleznyak A, Weilbaecher KN, Anderson CJ,Tomasson MH, Shokeen M)• In general, what does an immunoelectrophoresis assay accomplish?Immunoblot Assay: The Western BlotAfter performing protein gel electrophoresis, specific proteins can be identified in the gel using antibodies. Thistechnique is known as the western blot. Following separation of proteins by PAGE, the protein antigens in the gelare transferred to and immobilized on a nitrocellulose membrane. This membrane can then be exposed to a primaryantibody produced to specifically bind to the protein of interest. A second antibody equipped with a molecularbeacon will then bind to the first. These secondary antibodies are coupled to another molecule such as an enzymeor a fluorophore (a molecule that fluoresces when excited by light). When using antibodies coupled to enzymes,a chromogenic substrate for the enzyme is added. This substrate is usually colorless but will develop color in thepresence of the antibody. The fluorescence or substrate coloring identifies the location of the specific protein in themembrane to which the antibodies are bound (Figure 20.13).Typically, polyclonal antibodies are used for western blot assays. They are more sensitive than mAbs because oftheir ability to bind to various epitopes of the primary antigen, and the signal from polyclonal antibodies is typicallystronger than that from mAbs. Monoclonal antibodies can also be used; however, they are much more expensive toproduce and are less sensitive, since they are only able to recognize one specific epitope.Several variations of the western blot are useful in research. In a southwestern blot, proteins are separated bySDS-PAGE, blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane, allowed to renature, and then probed with a fluorescently orradioactively labeled DNA probe; the purpose of the southwestern is to identify specific DNA-protein interactions.Far-western blots are carried out to determine protein-protein interactions between immobilized proteins (separatedby SDS-PAGE, blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane, and allowed to renature) and non-antibody protein probes.The bound non-antibody proteins that interact with the immobilized proteins in a far-western blot may be detected byradiolabeling, fluorescence, or the use of an antibody with an enzymatic molecular beacon.874 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.13 (a) This diagram summarizes the process of western blotting. Antibodies are used to identify specificbands on the protein gel. (b) A western blot test for antibodies against HIV. The top strip is the negative control; thenext strip is the positive control. The bottom two strips are patient serum samples containing antibodies. (credit a:modification of work by “Bensaccount”/Wikimedia Commons)Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 875• What is the function of the enzyme in the immunoblot assay?Complement-Mediated ImmunoassayOne of the key functions of antibodies is the activation (fixation) of complement. When antibody binds to bacteria,for example, certain complement proteins recognize the bound antibody and activate the complement cascade. Inresponse, other complement proteins bind to the bacteria where some serve as opsonins to increase the efficiency ofphagocytosis and others create holes in gram-negative bacterial cell membranes, causing lysis. This lytic activity canbe used to detect the presence of antibodies against specific antigens in the serum.Red blood cells are good indicator cells to use when evaluating complement-mediated cytolysis. Hemolysis of redblood cells releases hemoglobin, which is a brightly colored pigment, and hemolysis of even a small number ofred cells will cause the solution to become noticeably pink (Figure 20.14). This characteristic plays a role in thecomplement fixation test, which allows the detection of antibodies against specific pathogens. The complementfixation test can be used to check for antibodies against pathogens that are difficult to culture in the lab such as fungi,viruses, or the bacteria Chlamydia.To perform the complement fixation test, antigen from a pathogen is added to patient serum. If antibodies to theantigen are present, the antibody will bind the antigen and fix all the available complement. When red blood cells andantibodies against red blood cells are subsequently added to the mix, there will be no complement left to lyse the redcells. Thus, if the solution remains clear, the test is positive. If there are no antipathogen antibodies in the patient’sserum, the added antibodies will activate the complement to lyse the red cells, yielding a negative test (Figure20.14).876 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.14 The complement fixation test is used to determine whether a patient’s serum contains antibodies to aspecific antigen. If it does, complement fixation will occur, and there will be no complement available to lyse theantibody-bound sheep red blood cells that are added to the solution in the next step. If the sample does not containantibodies to the antigen, hemolysis of the sheep blood cells will be observed.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 877View this video (https://openstax.org/l/22complfixatst) to see an outline of thesteps of the complement fixation test.• In a complement fixation test, if the serum turns pink, does the patient have antibodies to the antigen or not?Explain.Table 20.2 summarizes the various types of antibody-antigen assays discussed in this section.Mechanisms of Select Antibody-Antigen AssaysType ofAssayMechanism ExamplesPrecipitin ring test to visualize latticeformation in solutionImmunoelectrophoresis to examinedistribution of antigens followingelectrophoresisOuchterlony assay to compare diverseantigensPrecipitation Antibody binds to soluble antigen, forming avisible precipitinRadial immunodiffusion assay to quantifyantigensFlocculation Antibody binds to insoluble molecules insuspension, forming visible aggregatesVDRL test for syphilisNeutralization Antibody binds to virus, blocking viral entry intotarget cells and preventing formation of plaquesPlaque reduction assay for detectingpresence of neutralizing antibodies inpatient seraComplementactivationAntibody binds to antigen, inducing complementactivation and leaving no complement to lysered blood cellsComplement fixation test for patientantibodies against hard-to-culture bacteriasuch as ChlamydiaTable 20.2Link to Learning878 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.520.3 Agglutination AssaysLearning Objectives• Compare direct and indirect agglutination• Identify various uses of hemagglutination in the diagnosis of disease• Explain how blood types are determined• Explain the steps used to cross-match blood to be used in a transfusionIn addition to causing precipitation of soluble molecules and flocculation of molecules in suspension, antibodiescan also clump together cells or particles (e.g., antigen-coated latex beads) in a process called agglutination(Figure 18.9). Agglutination can be used as an indicator of the presence of antibodies against bacteria or red bloodcells. Agglutination assays are usually quick and easy to perform on a glass slide or microtiter plate (Figure20.15). Microtiter plates have an array of wells to hold small volumes of reagents and to observe reactions (e.g.,agglutination) either visually or using a specially designed spectrophotometer. The wells come in many different sizesfor assays involving different volumes of reagents.Figure 20.15 Microtiter plates are used for conducting numerous reactions simultaneously in an array of wells.(credit: modification of work by “Microrao”/Wikimedia)Agglutination of Bacteria and VirusesThe use of agglutination tests to identify streptococcal bacteria was developed in the 1920s by Rebecca Lancefieldworking with her colleagues A.R. Dochez and Oswald Avery.[9] She used antibodies to identify M protein, a virulencefactor on streptococci that is necessary for the bacteria’s ability to cause strep throat. Production of antibodies againstM protein is crucial in mounting a protective response against the bacteria.Lancefield used antisera to show that different strains of the same species of streptococci express different versionsof M protein, which explains why children can come down with strep throat repeatedly. Lancefield classified betahemolyticstreptococci into many groups based on antigenic differences in group-specific polysaccharides located inthe bacterial cell wall. The strains are called serovars because they are differentiated using antisera. Identifying theserovars present in a disease outbreak is important because some serovars may cause more severe disease than others.The method developed by Lancefield is a direct agglutination assay, since the bacterial cells themselves agglutinate.A similar strategy is more commonly used today when identifying serovars of bacteria and viruses; however, to9. Lancefield, Rebecca C., “The Antigenic Complex of Streptococcus haemoliticus. I. Demonstration of a Type-Specific Substance inExtracts of Streptococcus haemolyticus,” The Journal of Experimental Medicine 47, no. 1 (1928): 91-103.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 879improve visualization of the agglutination, the antibodies may be attached to inert latex beads. This technique iscalled an indirect agglutination assay (or latex fixation assay), because the agglutination of the beads is a marker forantibody binding to some other antigen (Figure 20.16). Indirect assays can be used to detect the presence of eitherantibodies or specific antigens.Figure 20.16 Antibodies against six different serovars of Group A strep were attached to latex beads. Each of thesix antibody preparations was mixed with bacteria isolated from a patient. The tiny clumps seen in well 4 areindicative of agglutination, which is absent from all other wells. This indicates that the serovar associated with well 4is present in the patient sample. (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)To identify antibodies in a patient’s serum, the antigen of interest is attached to latex beads. When mixed withpatient serum, the antibodies will bind the antigen, cross-linking the latex beads and causing the beads to agglutinateindirectly; this indicates the presence of the antibody (Figure 20.17). This technique is most often used whenlooking for IgM antibodies, because their structure provides maximum cross-linking. One widely used example ofthis assay is a test for rheumatoid factor (RF) to confirm a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. RF is, in fact, the presenceof IgM antibodies that bind to the patient’s own IgG. RF will agglutinate IgG-coated latex beads.In the reverse test, soluble antigens can be detected in a patient’s serum by attaching specific antibodies (commonlymAbs) to the latex beads and mixing this complex with the serum (Figure 20.17).Agglutination tests are widely used in underdeveloped countries that may lack appropriate facilities for culturingbacteria. For example, the Widal test, used for the diagnosis of typhoid fever, looks for agglutination of Salmonellaenterica subspecies typhi in patient sera. The Widal test is rapid, inexpensive, and useful for monitoring the extentof an outbreak; however, it is not as accurate as tests that involve culturing of the bacteria. The Widal test frequentlyproduces false positives in patients with previous infections with other subspecies of Salmonella, as well as falsenegatives in patients with hyperproteinemia or immune deficiencies.In addition, agglutination tests are limited by the fact that patients generally do not produce detectable levels ofantibody during the first week (or longer) of an infection. A patient is said to have undergone seroconversion whenantibody levels reach the threshold for detection. Typically, seroconversion coincides with the onset of signs andsymptoms of disease. However, in an HIV infection, for example, it generally takes 3 weeks for seroconversion totake place, and in some instances, it may take much longer.Similar to techniques for the precipitin ring test and plaque assays, it is routine to prepare serial two-fold dilutionsof the patient’s serum and determine the titer of agglutinating antibody present. Since antibody levels change overtime in both primary and secondary immune responses, by checking samples over time, changes in antibody titer canbe detected. For example, a comparison of the titer during the acute phase of an infection versus the titer from theconvalescent phase will distinguish whether an infection is current or has occurred in the past. It is also possible to880 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5monitor how well the patient’s immune system is responding to the pathogen.Figure 20.17 (a) Latex beads coated with an antigen will agglutinate when mixed with patient serum if the serumcontains IgM antibodies against the antigen. (b) Latex beads coated with antibodies will agglutinate when mixed withpatient serum if the serum contains antigens specific to the antibodies.Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/22agglrealatbe) that demonstratesagglutination reactions with latex beads.• How is agglutination used to distinguish serovars from each other?• In a latex bead assay to test for antibodies in a patient's serum, with what are the beads coated?• What has happened when a patient has undergone seroconversion?HemagglutinationAgglutination of red blood cells is called hemagglutination. One common assay that uses hemagglutination isthe direct Coombs’ test, also called the direct antihuman globulin test (DAT), which generally looks fornonagglutinating antibodies. The test can also detect complement attached to red blood cells.The Coombs’ test is often employed when a newborn has jaundice, yellowing of the skin caused by high bloodconcentrations of bilirubin, a product of the breakdown of hemoglobin in the blood. The Coombs’ test is used toLink to LearningChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 881determine whether the child’s red blood cells have been bound by the mother’s antibodies. These antibodies wouldactivate complement, leading to red blood cell lysis and the subsequent jaundice. Other conditions that can causepositive direct Coombs’ tests include hemolytic transfusion reactions, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, infectiousmononucleosis (caused by Epstein-Barr virus), syphilis, and Mycoplasma pneumonia. A positive direct Coombs’ testmay also be seen in some cancers and as an allergic reaction to some drugs (e.g., penicillin).The antibodies bound to red blood cells in these conditions are most often IgG, and because of the orientation ofthe antigen-binding sites on IgG and the comparatively large size of a red blood cell, it is unlikely that any visibleagglutination will occur. However, the presence of IgG bound to red blood cells can be detected by adding Coombs’reagent, an antiserum containing antihuman IgG antibodies (that may be combined with anti-complement) (Figure20.18). The Coombs’ reagent links the IgG attached to neighboring red blood cells and thus promotes agglutination.There is also an indirect Coombs’ test known as the indirect antiglobulin test (IAT). This screens an individualfor antibodies against red blood cell antigens (other than the A and B antigens) that are unbound in a patient’s serum(Figure 20.18). IAT can be used to screen pregnant women for antibodies that may cause hemolytic disease of thenewborn. It can also be used prior to giving blood transfusions. More detail on how the IAT is performed is discussedbelow.882 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.18 The steps in direct and indirect Coombs’ tests are shown in the illustration.Antibodies that bind to red blood cells are not the only cause of hemagglutination. Some viruses also bind to red bloodcells, and this binding can cause agglutination when the viruses cross-link the red blood cells. For example, influenzaviruses have two different types of viral spikes called neuraminidase (N) and hemagglutinin (H), the latter named forits ability to agglutinate red blood cells (see Viruses). Thus, we can use red blood cells to detect the presence ofinfluenza virus by direct hemagglutination assays (HA), in which the virus causes visible agglutination of red bloodcells. The mumps and rubella viruses can also be detected using HA.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 883Most frequently, a serial dilution viral agglutination assay is used to measure the titer or estimate the amount of virusproduced in cell culture or for vaccine production. A viral titer can be determined using a direct HA by making aserial dilution of the sample containing the virus, starting with a high concentration of sample that is then diluted in aseries of wells. The highest dilution producing visible agglutination is the titer. The assay is carried out in a microtiterplate with V- or round-bottomed wells. In the presence of agglutinating viruses, the red blood cells and virus clumptogether and produce a diffuse mat over the bottom of the well. In the absence of virus, the red blood cells roll orsediment to the bottom of the well and form a dense pellet, which is why flat-bottomed wells cannot be used (Figure20.19).A modification of the HA assay can be used to determine the titer of antiviral antibodies. The presence of theseantibodies in a patient’s serum or in a lab-produced antiserum will neutralize the virus and block it from agglutinatingthe red cells, making this a viral hemagglutination inhibition assay (HIA). In this assay, patient serum is mixedwith a standardized amount of virus. After a short incubation, a standardized amount of red blood cells is added andhemagglutination is observed. The titer of the patient’s serum is the highest dilution that blocks agglutination (Figure20.20).Figure 20.19 A viral suspension is mixed with a standardized amount of red blood cells. No agglutination of redblood cells is visible when the virus is absent, and the cells form a compact pellet at the bottom of the well. In thepresence of virus, a diffuse pink precipitate forms in the well. (credit bottom: modification of work by American Societyfor Microbiology)884 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.20 In this HIA, serum containing antibodies to influenzavirus underwent serial two-fold dilutions in amicrotiter plate. Red blood cells were then added to the wells. Agglutination only occurred in those wells where theantibodies were too dilute to neutralize the virus. The highest concentration at which agglutination occurs is the titerof the antibodies in the patient’s serum. In the case of this test, Sample A shows a titer of 128, and Sample C showsa titer of 64. (credit: modification of work by Evan Burkala)• What is the mechanism by which viruses are detected in a hemagglutination assay?• Which hemagglutination result tells us the titer of virus in a sample?Animals in the LaboratoryMuch of what we know today about the human immune system has been learned through research conductedusing animals—primarily, mammals—as models. Besides research, mammals are also used for the productionof most of the antibodies and other immune system components needed for immunodiagnostics. Vaccines,diagnostics, therapies, and translational medicine in general have all been developed through research withanimal models.Eye on EthicsChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 885Consider some of the common uses of laboratory animals for producing immune system components. Guineapigs are used as a source of complement, and mice are the primary source of cells for making mAbs. ThesemAbs can be used in research and for therapeutic purposes. Antisera are raised in a variety of species,including horses, sheep, goats, and rabbits. When producing an antiserum, the animal will usually be injectedat least twice, and adjuvants may be used to boost the antibody response. The larger animals used for makingantisera will have blood harvested repeatedly over long periods of time, with little harm to the animals, but thatis not usually the case for rabbits. Although we can obtain a few milliliters of blood from the ear veins of rabbits,we usually need larger volumes, which results in the deaths of the animals.We also use animals for the study of disease. The only way to grow Treponema pallidum for the study ofsyphilis is in living animals. Many viruses can be grown in cell culture, but growth in cell culture tells us verylittle about how the immune system will respond to the virus. When working on a newly discovered disease,we still employ Koch’s postulates, which require causing disease in lab animals using pathogens from pureculture as a crucial step in proving that a particular microorganism is the cause of a disease. Studying theproliferation of bacteria and viruses in animal hosts, and how the host immune system responds, has beencentral to microbiological research for well over 100 years.While the practice of using laboratory animals is essential to scientific research and medical diagnostics, manypeople strongly object to the exploitation of animals for human benefit. This ethical argument is not a newone—indeed, one of Charles Darwin's daughters was an active antivivisectionist (vivisection is the practice ofcutting or dissecting a live animal to study it). Most scientists acknowledge that there should be limits on theextent to which animals can be exploited for research purposes. Ethical considerations have led the NationalInstitutes of Health (NIH) to develop strict regulations on the types of research that may be performed. Theseregulations also include guidelines for the humane treatment of lab animals, setting standards for their housing,care, and euthanization. The NIH document “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” makes it clearthat the use of animals in research is a privilege granted by society to researchers.The NIH guidelines are based on the principle of the three R’s: replace, refine, and reduce. Researchersshould strive to replace animal models with nonliving models, replace vertebrates with invertebrates wheneverpossible, or use computer-models when applicable. They should refine husbandry and experimentalprocedures to reduce pain and suffering, and use experimental designs and procedures that reduce thenumber of animals needed to obtain the desired information. To obtain funding, researchers must satisfy NIHreviewers that the research justifies the use of animals and that their use is in accordance with the guidelines.At the local level, any facility that uses animals and receives federal funding must have an Institutional AnimalCare and Use Committee (IACUC) that ensures that the NIH guidelines are being followed. The IACUC mustinclude researchers, administrators, a veterinarian, and at least one person with no ties to the institution, thatis, a concerned citizen. This committee also performs inspections of laboratories and protocols. For researchinvolving human subjects, an Institutional Review Board (IRB) ensures that proper guidelines are followed.Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/22NIHcareuseani) to view the NIH Guidefor the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.Blood Typing and Cross-MatchingIn addition to antibodies against bacteria and viruses to which they have previously been exposed, most individualsalso carry antibodies against blood types other than their own. There are presently 33 immunologically importantLink to Learning886 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5blood-type systems, many of which are restricted within various ethnic groups or rarely result in the production ofantibodies. The most important and perhaps best known are the ABO and Rh blood groups (see Figure 19.4).When units of blood are being considered for transfusion, pretransfusion blood testing must be performed. For theblood unit, commercially prepared antibodies against the A, B, and Rh antigens are mixed with red blood cells fromthe units to initially confirm that the blood type on the unit is accurate. Once a unit of blood has been requested fortransfusion, it is vitally important to make sure the donor (unit of blood) and recipient (patient) are compatible forthese crucial antigens. In addition to confirming the blood type of the unit, the patient’s blood type is also confirmedusing the same commercially prepared antibodies to A, B, and Rh. For example, as shown in Figure 20.21, ifthe donor blood is A-positive, it will agglutinate with the anti-A antiserum and with the anti-Rh antiserum. If noagglutination is observed with any of the sera, then the blood type would be O-negative.Following determination of the blood type, immediately prior to releasing the blood for transfusion, a cross-matchis performed in which a small aliquot of the donor red blood cells are mixed with serum from the patient awaitingtransfusion. If the patient does have antibodies against the donor red blood cells, hemagglutination will occur. Toconfirm any negative test results and check for sensitized red blood cells, Coombs’ reagent may be added to the mixto facilitate visualization of the antibody-red blood cell interaction.Under some circumstances, a minor cross-match may be performed as well. In this assay, a small aliquot of donorserum is mixed with patient red blood cells. This allows the detection of agglutinizing antibodies in the donor serum.This test is rarely necessary because transfusions generally use packed red blood cells with most of the plasmaremoved by centrifugation.Red blood cells have many other antigens in addition to ABO and Rh. While most people are unlikely to haveantibodies against these antigens, women who have had multiple pregnancies or patients who have had multipletransfusions may have them because of repeated exposure. For this reason, an antibody screen test is used todetermine if such antibodies are present. Patient serum is checked against commercially prepared, pooled, type O redblood cells that express these antigens. If agglutination occurs, the antigen to which the patient is responding must beidentified and determined not to be present in the donor unit.Figure 20.21 This sample of a commercially produced “bedside” card enables quick typing of both a recipient’s anddonor’s blood before transfusion. The card contains three reaction sites or wells. One is coated with an anti-Aantibody, one with an anti-B antibody, and one with an anti-Rh antibody. Agglutination of red blood cells in a given siteindicates a positive identification of the blood antigens: in this case, A and Rh antigens for blood type A-positive.• If a patient's blood agglutinates with anti-B serum, what is the patient’s blood type?• What is a cross-match assay, and why is it performed?Table 20.3 summarizes the various kinds of agglutination assays discussed in this section.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 887Mechanisms of Select Antibody-Antigen AssaysType of Assay Mechanism ExampleDirect: Antibody is used to clump bacterial cells or otherlarge structuresAgglutination Serotyping bacteriaIndirect: Latex beads are coupled with antigen or antibodyto look for antibody or antigen, respectively, in patientserumConfirming the presence ofrheumatoid factor (IgMbindingIg) in patient serumDirect: Some bacteria and viruses cross-link red bloodcells and clump them togetherDiagnosing influenza,mumps, and measlesDirect Coombs’ test (DAT): Detects nonagglutinatingantibodies or complement proteins on red blood cells invivoChecking for maternalantibodies binding toneonatal red blood cellsIndirect Coombs’ test (IAT): Screens an individual forantibodies against red blood cell antigens (other than the Aand B antigens) that are unbound in a patient’s serum invitroPerforming pretransfusionblood testingViral hemagglutination inhibition: Uses antibodies from apatient to inhibit viral agglutinationDiagnosing various viraldiseases by the presence ofpatient antibodies againstthe virusHemagglutinationBlood typing and cross-matching: Detects ABO, Rh, andminor antigens in the bloodMatches donor blood torecipient immunerequirementsTable 20.320.4 EIAs and ELISAsLearning Objectives• Explain the differences and similarities between EIA, FEIA, and ELISA• Describe the difference and similarities between immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry• Describe the different purposes of direct and indirect ELISASimilar to the western blot, enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) use antibodies to detect the presence of antigens.However, EIAs differ from western blots in that the assays are conducted in microtiter plates or in vivo rather thanon an absorbent membrane. There are many different types of EIAs, but they all involve an antibody molecule whoseconstant region binds an enzyme, leaving the variable region free to bind its specific antigen. The addition of asubstrate for the enzyme allows the antigen to be visualized or quantified (Figure 20.22).In EIAs, the substrate for the enzyme is most often a chromogen, a colorless molecule that is converted into acolored end product. The most widely used enzymes are alkaline phosphatase and horseradish peroxidase for whichappropriate substrates are readily available. In some EIAs, the substrate is a fluorogen, a nonfluorescent moleculethat the enzyme converts into a fluorescent form. EIAs that utilize a fluorogen are called fluorescent enzymeimmunoassays (FEIAs). Fluorescence can be detected by either a fluorescence microscope or a spectrophotometer.888 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.22 Enzyme immunoassays, such as the direct ELISA shown here, use an enzyme-antibody conjugate todeliver a detectable substrate to the site of an antigen. The substrate may be a colorless molecule that is convertedinto a colored end product or an inactive fluorescent molecule that fluoresces after enzyme activation. (credit:modification of work by “Cavitri”/Wikimedia Commons)The MMR TiterThe MMR vaccine is a combination vaccine that provides protection against measles, mumps, and rubella(German measles). Most people receive the MMR vaccine as children and thus have antibodies againstthese diseases. However, for various reasons, even vaccinated individuals may become susceptible to thesediseases again later in life. For example, some children may receive only one round of the MMR vaccineinstead of the recommended two. In addition, the titer of protective antibodies in an individual’s body may beginto decline with age or as the result of some medical conditions.To determine whether the titer of antibody in an individual’s bloodstream is sufficient to provide protection, anMMR titer test can be performed. The test is a simple immunoassay that can be done quickly with a bloodsample. The results of the test will indicate whether the individual still has immunity or needs another dose ofthe MMR vaccine.Submitting to an MMR titer is often a pre-employment requirement for healthcare workers, especially thosewho will frequently be in contact with young children or immunocompromised patients. Were a healthcareworker to become infected with measles, mumps, or rubella, the individual could easily pass these diseases onto susceptible patients, leading to an outbreak. Depending on the results of the MMR titer, healthcare workersmight need to be revaccinated prior to beginning work.ImmunostainingOne powerful use of EIA is immunostaining, in which antibody-enzyme conjugates enhance microscopy.Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is used for examining whole tissues. As seen in Figure 20.23, a section of tissuecan be stained to visualize the various cell types. In this example, a mAb against CD8 was used to stain CD8 cells ina section of tonsil tissue. It is now possible to count the number of CD8 cells, determine their relative numbers versusthe other cell types present, and determine the location of these cells within this tissue. Such data would be useful forstudying diseases such as AIDS, in which the normal function of CD8 cells is crucial for slowing disease progression.Immunocytochemistry (ICC) is another valuable form of immunostaining. While similar to IHC, in ICC,extracellular matrix material is stripped away, and the cell membrane is etched with alcohol to make it permeableMicro ConnectionsChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 889to antibodies. This allows antibodies to pass through the cell membrane and bind to specific targets inside the cell.Organelles, cytoskeletal components, and other intracellular structures can be visualized in this way. While some ICCtechniques use EIA, the enzyme can be replaced with a fluorescent molecule, making it a fluorescent immunoassay.Figure 20.23 Enzyme-linked antibodies against CD8 were used to stain the CD8 cells in this preparation of bonemarrow using a chromogen. (credit: modification of work by Yamashita M, Fujii Y, Ozaki K, Urano Y, Iwasa M,Nakamura S, Fujii S, Abe M, Sato Y, Yoshino T)• What is the difference between immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry?• What must be true of the product of the enzymatic reaction used in immunohistochemistry?Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISAs)The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are widely used EIAs. In the direct ELISA, antigens areimmobilized in the well of a microtiter plate. An antibody that is specific for a particular antigen and is conjugated toan enzyme is added to each well. If the antigen is present, then the antibody will bind. After washing to remove anyunbound antibodies, a colorless substrate (chromogen) is added. The presence of the enzyme converts the substrateinto a colored end product (Figure 20.22). While this technique is faster because it only requires the use of oneantibody, it has the disadvantage that the signal from a direct ELISA is lower (lower sensitivity).In a sandwich ELISA, the goal is to use antibodies to precisely quantify specific antigen present in a solution, suchas antigen from a pathogen, a serum protein, or a hormone from the blood or urine to list just a few examples. Thefirst step of a sandwich ELISA is to add the primary antibody to all the wells of a microtiter plate (Figure 20.24).The antibody sticks to the plastic by hydrophobic interactions. After an appropriate incubation time, any unboundantibody is washed away. Comparable washes are used between each of the subsequent steps to ensure that onlyspecifically bound molecules remain attached to the plate. A blocking protein is then added (e.g., albumin or the milkprotein casein) to bind the remaining nonspecific protein-binding sites in the well. Some of the wells will receiveknown amounts of antigen to allow the construction of a standard curve, and unknown antigen solutions are added tothe other wells. The primary antibody captures the antigen and, following a wash, the secondary antibody is added,which is a polyclonal antibody that is conjugated to an enzyme. After a final wash, a colorless substrate (chromogen)890 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5is added, and the enzyme converts it into a colored end product. The color intensity of the sample caused by the endproduct is measured with a spectrophotometer. The amount of color produced (measured as absorbance) is directlyproportional to the amount of enzyme, which in turn is directly proportional to the captured antigen. ELISAs areextremely sensitive, allowing antigen to be quantified in the nanogram (10–9 g) per mL range.In an indirect ELISA, we quantify antigen-specific antibody rather than antigen.We can use indirect ELISA to detectantibodies against many types of pathogens, including Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) and HIV. There are threeimportant differences between indirect and direct ELISAs as shown in Figure 20.25. Rather than using antibodyto capture antigen, the indirect ELISA starts with attaching known antigen (e.g., peptides from HIV) to the bottomof the microtiter plate wells. After blocking the unbound sites on the plate, patient serum is added; if antibodies arepresent (primary antibody), they will bind the antigen. After washing away any unbound proteins, the secondaryantibody with its conjugated enzyme is directed against the primary antibody (e.g., antihuman immunoglobulin). Thesecondary antibody allows us to quantify how much antigen-specific antibody is present in the patient’s serum by theintensity of the color produced from the conjugated enzyme-chromogen reaction.As with several other tests for antibodies discussed in this chapter, there is always concern about cross-reactivity withantibodies directed against some other antigen, which can lead to false-positive results. Thus, we cannot definitivelydiagnose an HIV infection (or any other type of infection) based on a single indirect ELISA assay. We must confirmany suspected positive test, which is most often done using either an immunoblot that actually identifies the presenceof specific peptides from the pathogen or a test to identify the nucleic acids associated with the pathogen, such asreverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) or a nucleic acid antigen test.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 891Figure 20.24 (a) In a sandwich ELISA, a primary antibody is used to first capture an antigen with the primaryantibody. A secondary antibody conjugated to an enzyme that also recognizes epitopes on the antigen is added. Afterthe addition of the chromogen, a spectrophotometer measures the absorbance of end product, which is directlyproportional to the amount of captured antigen. (b) An ELISA plate shows dilutions of antibodies (left) and antigens(bottom). Higher concentrations result in a darker final color. (credit b: modification of work by U.S. Fish and WildlifeService Pacific Region)892 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.25 The indirect ELISA is used to quantify antigen-specific antibodies in patient serum for diseasediagnosis. Antigen from the suspected disease agent is attached to microtiter plates. The primary antibody comesfrom the patient’s serum, which is subsequently bound by the enzyme-conjugated secondary antibody. Measuring theproduction of end product allows us to detect or quantify the amount of antigen-specific antibody present in thepatient’s serum.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 893• What is the purpose of the secondary antibody in a direct ELISA?• What do the direct and indirect ELISAs quantify?Part 2Although contacting and testing the 1300 patients for HIV would be time consuming and expensive,administrators hoped to minimize the hospital’s liability by proactively seeking out and treating potential victimsof the rogue employee’s crime. Early detection of HIV is important, and prompt treatment can slow theprogression of the disease.There are a variety of screening tests for HIV, but the most widely used is the indirect ELISA. As with otherindirect ELISAs, the test works by attaching antigen (in this case, HIV peptides) to a well in a 96-well plate. Ifthe patient is HIV positive, anti-HIV antibodies will bind to the antigen and be identified by the second antibodyenzymeconjugate.• How accurate is an indirect ELISA test for HIV, and what factors could impact the test’s accuracy?• Should the hospital use any other tests to confirm the results of the indirect ELISA?Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box. Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Immunofiltration and Immunochromatographic AssaysFor some situations, it may be necessary to detect or quantify antigens or antibodies that are present at verylow concentration in solution. Immunofiltration techniques have been developed to make this possible. Inimmunofiltration, a large volume of fluid is passed through a porous membrane into an absorbent pad. An antigenattached to the porous membrane will capture antibody as it passes; alternatively, we can also attach an antibody tothe membrane to capture antigen.The method of immunofiltration has been adapted in the development of immunochromatographic assays,commonly known as lateral flow tests or strip tests. These tests are quick and easy to perform, making them popularfor point-of-care use (i.e., in the doctor’s office) or in-home use. One example is the TORCH test that allows doctorsto screen pregnant women or newborns for infection by an array of viruses and other pathogens (Toxoplasma, otherviruses, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex). In-home pregnancy tests are another widely used example of alateral flow test (Figure 20.26). Immunofiltration tests are also popular in developing countries, because they areinexpensive and do not require constant refrigeration of the dried reagents. However, the technology is also built intosome sophisticated laboratory equipment.In lateral flow tests (Figure 20.27), fluids such as urine are applied to an absorbent pad on the test strip. The fluidflows by capillary action and moves through a stripe of beads with antibodies attached to their surfaces. The fluidin the sample actually hydrates the reagents, which are present in a dried state in the stripe. Antibody-coated beadsmade of latex or tiny gold particles will bind antigens in the test fluid. The antibody-antigen complexes then flow overa second stripe that has immobilized antibody against the antigen; this stripe will retain the beads that have boundantigen. A third control stripe binds any beads. A red color (from gold particles) or blue (from latex beads) developingat the test line indicates a positive test. If the color only develops at the control line, the test is negative.Like ELISA techniques, lateral flow tests take advantage of antibody sandwiches, providing sensitivity andspecificity. While not as quantitative as ELISA, these tests have the advantage of being fast, inexpensive, and notdependent on special equipment. Thus, they can be performed anywhere by anyone. There are some concerns aboutClinical Focus894 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5putting such powerful diagnostic tests into the hands of people who may not understand the tests’ limitations, such asthe possibility of false-positive results. While home pregnancy tests have become widely accepted, at-home antibodydetectiontests for diseases like HIV have raised some concerns in the medical community. Some have questionedwhether self-administration of such tests should be allowed in the absence of medical personnel who can explain thetest results and order appropriate confirmatory tests. However, with growing numbers of lateral flow tests becomingavailable, and the rapid development of lab-on-a-chip technology (Figure 20.1), home medical tests are likely tobecome even more commonplace in the future.Figure 20.26 A lateral flow test detecting pregnancy-related hormones in urine. The control stripe verifies the validityof the test and the test line determines the presence of pregnancy-related hormones in the urine. (credit: modificationof work by Klaus Hoffmeier)Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 895Figure 20.27 Immunochromatographic assays, or lateral flow tests, allow the testing of antigen in a dilute solution.As the fluid flows through the test strip, it rehydrates the reagents. Antibodies conjugated to small particles bind theantigen in the first stripe and then flow onto the second stripe where they are bound by a second, fixed antibody. Thisproduces a line of color, depending on the color of the beads. The third, control stripe binds beads as well to indicatethat the test is working properly. (credit: modification of work by Yeh CH, Zhao ZQ, Shen PL, Lin YC)• What physical process does the lateral flow method require to function?• Explain the purpose of the third strip in a lateral flow assay.896 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Table 20.4 compares some of the key mechanisms and examples of some of the EIAs discussed in this section aswell as immunoblots, which were discussed in Detecting Antigen-Antibody Complexes.Immunoblots & Enzyme ImmunoassaysType of Assay Mechanism Specific Procedures ExamplesImmunoblots Uses enzyme-antibodyconjugates to identify specificproteins that have beentransferred to an absorbentmembraneWestern blot: Detectsthe presence of aparticular proteinDetecting the presenceof HIV peptides (orpeptides from otherinfectious agents) inpatient seraImmunostaining Uses enzyme-antibodyconjugates to stain specificmolecules on or in cellsImmunohistochemistry:Used to stain specificcells in a tissueStain for presence ofCD8 cells in hosttissueDirect ELISA: Uses asingle antibody todetect the presence ofan antigenDetection of HIVantigen p24 up to onemonth after beinginfectedEnzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay(ELISA)Uses enzyme-antibodyconjugates to quantify targetmoleculesIndirect ELISA:Measures the amountof antibody producedagainst an antigenDetection of HIVantibodies in serumDetection of antibodiesfor various pathogensin patient sera (e.g.,rapid strep, malariadipstick)Immunochromatographic(lateral flow) assaysTechniques use the captureof flowing, color-labeledantigen-antibody complexesby fixed antibody for diseasediagnosisSandwich ELISA:Measures the amountof antigen bound bythe antibodyPregnancy testdetecting humanchorionicgonadotrophin in urineTable 20.4Part 3Although the indirect ELISA for HIV is a sensitive assay, there are several complicating considerations. First,if an infected person is tested too soon after becoming infected, the test can yield false-negative results. Theseroconversion window is generally about three weeks, but in some cases, it can be more than two months.In addition to false negatives, false positives can also occur, usually due to previous infections with otherviruses that induce cross-reacting antibodies. The false-positive rate depends on the particular brand of testused, but 0.5% is not unusual.[10] Because of the possibility of a false positive, all positive tests are followed upwith a confirmatory test. This confirmatory test is often an immunoblot (western blot) in which HIV peptides fromthe patient’s blood are identified using an HIV-specific mAb-enzyme conjugate. A positive western blot wouldconfirm an HIV infection and a negative blot would confirm the absence of HIV despite the positive ELISA.Unfortunately, western blots for HIV antigens often yield indeterminant results, in which case, they neitherconfirm nor invalidate the results of the indirect ELISA. In fact, the rate of indeterminants can be 10–49%(which is why, combined with their cost, western blots are not used for screening). Similar to the indirect ELISA,an indeterminant western blot can occur because of cross-reactivity or previous viral infections, vaccinations,Clinical FocusChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 897or autoimmune diseases.• Of the 1300 patients being tested, how many false-positive ELISA tests would be expected?• Of the false positives, how many indeterminant western blots could be expected?• How would the hospital address any cases in which a patient’s western blot was indeterminant?Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box. Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.20.5 Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesLearning Objectives• Describe the benefits of immunofluorescent antibody assays in comparison to nonfluorescent assays• Compare direct and indirect fluorescent antibody assays• Explain how a flow cytometer can be used to quantify specific subsets of cells present in a complex mixture ofcell types• Explain how a fluorescence-activated cell sorter can be used to separate unique types of cellsRapid visualization of bacteria from a clinical sample such as a throat swab or sputum can be achieved throughfluorescent antibody (FA) techniques that attach a fluorescent marker (fluorogen) to the constant region of anantibody, resulting in a reporter molecule that is quick to use, easy to see or measure, and able to bind to targetmarkers with high specificity. We can also label cells, allowing us to precisely quantify particular subsets of cells oreven purify these subsets for further research.As with the enzyme assays, FA methods may be direct, in which a labeled mAb binds an antigen, or indirect, inwhich secondary polyclonal antibodies bind patient antibodies that react to a prepared antigen. Applications of thesetwo methods were demonstrated in Figure 2.19. FA methods are also used in automated cell counting and sortingsystems to enumerate or segregate labeled subpopulations of cells in a sample.Direct Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesDirect fluorescent antibody (DFA) tests use a fluorescently labeled mAb to bind and illuminate a target antigen.DFA tests are particularly useful for the rapid diagnosis of bacterial diseases. For example, fluorescence-labeledantibodies against Streptococcus pyogenes (group A strep) can be used to obtain a diagnosis of strep throat from athroat swab. The diagnosis is ready in a matter of minutes, and the patient can be started on antibiotics before evenleaving the clinic. DFA techniques may also be used to diagnose pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae orLegionella pneumophila from sputum samples (Figure 20.28). The fluorescent antibodies bind to the bacteria on amicroscope slide, allowing ready detection of the bacteria using a fluorescence microscope. Thus, the DFA techniqueis valuable for visualizing certain bacteria that are difficult to isolate or culture from patient samples.10. Thomas, Justin G., Victor Jaffe, Judith Shaffer, and Jose Abreu, “HIV Testing: US Recommendations 2014,” Osteopathic FamilyPhysician 6, no. 6 (2014).898 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.28 A green fluorescent mAb against L. pneumophila is used here to visualize and identify bacteria from asmear of a sample from the respiratory tract of a pneumonia patient. (credit: modification of work by American Societyfor Microbiology)Watch the animation (https://openstax.org/l/22dirfluorant) on this page toreview the procedures of the direct fluorescent antibody test.• In a direct fluorescent antibody test, what does the fluorescent antibody bind to?Indirect Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesIndirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) tests (Figure 20.29) are used to look for antibodies in patient serum. Forexample, an IFA test for the diagnosis of syphilis uses T. pallidum cells isolated from a lab animal (the bacteriacannot be grown on lab media) and a smear prepared on a glass slide. Patient serum is spread over the smear andanti-treponemal antibodies, if present, are allowed to bind. The serum is washed off and a secondary antibody added.The secondary antibody is an antihuman immunoglobulin conjugated to a fluorogen. On examination, the T. pallidumbacteria will only be visible if they have been bound by the antibodies from the patient’s serum.The IFA test for syphilis provides an important complement to the VDRL test discussed in Detecting Antigen-Antibody Complexes. The VDRL is more likely to generate false-positive reactions than the IFA test; however,the VDRL is a better test for determining whether an infection is currently active.IFA tests are also useful for the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases. For example, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)(see Autoimmune Disorders) is characterized by elevated expression levels of antinuclear antibodies (ANA).These autoantibodies can be expressed against a variety of DNA-binding proteins and even against DNA itself.Because autoimmunity is often difficult to diagnose, especially early in disease progression, testing for ANA can beLink to LearningChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 899a valuable clue in making a diagnosis and starting appropriate treatment.The IFA for ANA begins by fixing cells grown in culture to a glass slide and making them permeable to antibody.The slides are then incubated with serial dilutions of serum from the patient. After incubation, the slide is washed toremove unbound proteins, and the fluorescent antibody (antihuman IgG conjugated to a fluorogen) added. After anincubation and wash, the cells can be examined for fluorescence evident around the nucleus (Figure 20.30). Thetiter of ANA in the serum is determined by the highest dilution showing fluorescence. Because many healthy peopleexpress ANA, the American College of Rheumatology recommends that the titer must be at least 1:40 in the presenceof symptoms involving two or more organ systems to be considered indicative of SLE.[11]11. Gill, James M., ANNA M. Quisel, PETER V. Rocca, and DENE T. Walters. “Diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus.” Americanfamily physician 68, no. 11 (2003): 2179-2186.900 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.29 (a) The IFA test is used to detect antigen-specific antibodies by allowing them to bind to antigen fixedto a surface and then illuminating these complexes with a secondary antibody-fluorogen conjugate. (b) In thisexample of a micrograph of an indirect fluorescent antibody test, a patient’s antibodies to the measles virus bind toviral antigens present on inactivated measles-infected cells affixed to a slide. Secondary antibodies bind the patient’santibodies and carry a fluorescent molecule. (credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 901Figure 20.30 In this test for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), cells are exposed to serum from a patient suspected ofmaking ANA and then to a fluorescent mAb specific for human immunoglobulin. As a control, serum from a healthypatient is also used. Visible fluorescence around the nucleus demonstrates the presence of ANA in the patient’sserum. In the healthy control where lower levels of ANA are produced, very faint green is detected. (credit left, right:modification of work by Al-Hussaini AA, Alzahrani MD, Alenizi AS, Suliman NM, Khan MA, Alharbi SA, Chentoufi AA)• In an indirect fluorescent antibody test, what does the fluorescent antibody bind to?• What is the ANA test looking for?Flow CytometryFluorescently labeled antibodies can be used to quantify cells of a specific type in a complex mixture using flowcytometry (Figure 20.31), an automated, cell-counting system that detects fluorescing cells as they pass througha narrow tube one cell at a time. For example, in HIV infections, it is important to know the level of CD4 T cellsin the patient’s blood; if the numbers fall below 500 per μL of blood, the patient becomes more likely to acquireopportunistic infections; below 200 per μL, the patient can no longer mount a useful adaptive immune responseat all. The analysis begins by incubating a mixed-cell population (e.g., white blood cells from a donor) with afluorescently labeled mAb specific for a subpopulation of cells (e.g., anti-CD4). Some experiments look at two cellmarkers simultaneously by adding a different fluorogen to the appropriate mAb. The cells are then introduced to theflow cytometer through a narrow capillary that forces the cells to pass in single file. A laser is used to activate thefluorogen. The fluorescent light radiates out in all directions, so the fluorescence detector can be positioned at anangle from the incident laser light.Figure 20.31 shows the obscuration bar in front of the forward-scatter detector that prevents laser light fromhitting the detector. As a cell passes through the laser bar, the forward-scatter detector detects light scattered aroundthe obscuration bar. The scattered light is transformed into a voltage pulse, and the cytometer counts a cell. Thefluorescence from a labeled cell is detected by the side-scatter detectors. The light passes through various dichroicmirrors such that the light emitted from the fluorophore is received by the correct detector.902 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 20.31 In flow cytometry, a mixture of fluorescently labeled and unlabeled cells passes through a narrowcapillary. A laser excites the fluorogen, and the fluorescence intensity of each cell is measured by a detector. (credit:modification of work by “Kierano”/Wikimedia Commons)Data are collected from both the forward- and side-scatter detectors. One way these data can be presented is in theform of a histogram. The forward scatter is placed on the y-axis (to represent the number of cells), and the sidescatter is placed on the x-axis (to represent the fluoresence of each cell). The scaling for the x-axis is logarithmic,so fluorescence intensity increases by a factor of 10 with each unit increase along the axis. Figure 20.32 depictsan example in which a culture of cells is combined with an antibody attached to a fluorophore to detect CD8 cellsand then analyzed by flow cytometry. The histogram has two peaks. The peak on the left has lower fluorescencereadings, representing the subset of the cell population (approximately 30 cells) that does not fluoresce; hence, theyare not bound by antibody and therefore do not express CD8. The peak on the right has higher fluorescence readings,representing the subset of the cell population (approximately 100 cells) that show fluorescence; hence, they are boundby the antibody and therefore do express CD8.Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 903Figure 20.32 Flow cytometry data are often compiled as a histogram. In the histogram, the area under each peak isproportional to the number of cells in each population. The x-axis is the relative fluorescence expressed by the cells(on a log scale), and the y-axis represents the number of cells at a particular level of fluorescence.• What is the purpose of the laser in a flow cytometer?• In the output from a flow cytometer, the area under the histogram is equivalent to what?ResolutionAfter notifying all 1300 patients, the hospital begins scheduling HIV screening. Appointments were scheduleda minimum of 3 weeks after the patient’s last hospital visit to minimize the risk of false negatives. Becausesome false positives were anticipated, the public health physician set up a counseling protocol for any patientwhose indirect ELISA came back positive.Of the 1300 patients, eight tested positive using the ELISA. Five of these tests were invalidated by negativewestern blot tests, but one western blot came back positive, confirming that the patient had indeed contractedHIV. The two remaining western blots came back indeterminate. These individuals had to submit to a third test,a PCR, to confirm the presence or absence of HIV sequences. Luckily, both patients tested negative.As for the lone patient confirmed to have HIV, the tests cannot prove or disprove any connection to the syringescompromised by the former hospital employee. Even so, the hospital’s insurance will fully cover the patient’streatment, which began immediately.Although we now have drugs that are typically effective at controlling the progression of HIV and AIDS, thereis still no cure. If left untreated, or if the drug regimen fails, the patient will experience a gradual decline inthe number of CD4 helper T cells, resulting in severe impairment of all adaptive immune functions. Evenmoderate declines of helper T cell numbers can result in immunodeficiency, leaving the patient susceptible toopportunistic infections. To monitor the status of the patient’s helper T cells, the hospital will use flow cytometry.This sensitive test allows physicians to precisely determine the number of helper T cells so they can adjusttreatment if the number falls below 500 cells/μL.Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus904 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Cell Sorting Using ImmunofluorescenceThe flow cytometer and immunofluorescence can also be modified to sort cells from a single sample into purifiedsubpopulations of cells for research purposes. This modification of the flow cytometer is called a fluorescenceactivatedcell sorter (FACS). In a FACS, fluorescence by a cell induces the device to put a charge on a droplet of thetransporting fluid containing that cell. The charge is specific to the wavelength of the fluorescent light, which allowsfor differential sorting by those different charges. The sorting is accomplished by an electrostatic deflector that movesthe charged droplet containing the cell into one collecting vessel or another. The process results in highly purifiedsubpopulations of cells.One limitation of a FACS is that it only works on isolated cells. Thus, the method would work in sorting white bloodcells, since they exist as isolated cells. But for cells in a tissue, flow cytometry can only be applied if we can excisethe tissue and separate it into single cells (using proteases to cleave cell-cell adhesion molecules) without disruptingcell integrity. This method may be used on tumors, but more often, immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistryare used to study cells in tissues.Watch videos to learn more about how flow cytometry (https://openstax.org/l/22flowcytometry) and a FACS (https://openstax.org/l/22FACSwork) work.• In fluorescence activated cell sorting, what characteristic of the target cells allows them to be separated?Table 20.5 compares the mechanisms of the fluorescent antibody techniques discussed in this section.Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesType ofAssayMechanism ExamplesDirectfluorescentantibody(DFA)Uses fluorogen-antibody conjugates to label bacteriafrom patient samplesVisualizing Legionella pneumophilafrom a throat swabIndirectfluorescentantibody(IFA)Detects disease-specific antibodies in patent serum Diagnosing syphilis; detectingantinuclear antibodies (ANA) forlupus and other autoimmunediseasesFlowcytometryLabels cell membranes with fluorogen-antibodyconjugate markers excited by a laser; machine countsthe cell and records the relative fluorescenceCounting the number of fluorescentlylabeled CD4 or CD8 cells in asampleTable 20.5Link to LearningChapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune Response 905Fluorescent Antibody TechniquesType ofAssayMechanism ExamplesFluorescenceactivated cellsorter(FACS)Form of flow cytometry that both counts cells andphysically separates them into pools of high and lowfluorescence cellsSorting cancer cellsTable 20.5Summary20.1 Polyclonal and Monoclonal Antibody Production• Antibodies bind with high specificity to antigens used to challenge the immune system, but they may alsoshow cross-reactivity by binding to other antigens that share chemical properties with the original antigen.• Injection of an antigen into an animal will result in a polyclonal antibody response in which differentantibodies are produced that react with the various epitopes on the antigen.• Polyclonal antisera are useful for some types of laboratory assays, but other assays require more specificity.Diagnostic tests that use polyclonal antisera are typically only used for screening because of the possibility offalse-positive and false-negative results.• Monoclonal antibodies provide higher specificity than polyclonal antisera because they bind to a singleepitope and usually have high affinity.• Monoclonal antibodies are typically produced by culturing antibody-secreting hybridomas derived frommice. mAbs are currently used to treat cancer, but their exorbitant cost has prevented them from being usedmore widely to treat infectious diseases. Still, their potential for laboratory and clinical use is driving thedevelopment of new, cost-effective solutions such as plantibodies.20.2 Detecting Antigen-Antibody Complexes• When present in the correct ratio, antibody and antigen will form a precipitin, or lattice that precipitates outof solution.• A precipitin ring test can be used to visualize lattice formation in solution. The Ouchterlony assaydemonstrates lattice formation in a gel. The radial immunodiffusion assay is used to quantify antigen bymeasuring the size of a precipitation zone in a gel infused with antibodies.• Insoluble antigens in suspension will form flocculants when bound by antibodies. This is the basis of theVDRL test for syphilis in which anti-treponemal antibodies bind to cardiolipin in suspension.• Viral infections can be detected by quantifying virus-neutralizing antibodies in a patient’s serum.• Different antibody classes in plasma or serum are identified by using immunoelectrophoresis.• The presence of specific antigens (e.g., bacterial or viral proteins) in serum can be demonstrated by westernblot assays, in which the proteins are transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane and identified using labeledantibodies.• In the complement fixation test, complement is used to detect antibodies against various pathogens.20.3 Agglutination Assays• Antibodies can agglutinate cells or large particles into a visible matrix. Agglutination tests are often done oncards or in microtiter plates that allow multiple reactions to take place side by side using small volumes ofreagents.• Using antisera against certain proteins allows identification of serovars within species of bacteria.• Detecting antibodies against a pathogen can be a powerful tool for diagnosing disease, but there is a period oftime before patients go through seroconversion and the level of antibodies becomes detectable.906 Chapter 20 | Laboratory Analysis of the Immune ResponseThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Agglutination of latex beads in indirect agglutination assays can be used to detect the presence of specificantigens or specific antibodies in patient serum.• The presence of some antibacterial and antiviral antibodies can be confirmed by the use of the directCoombs’ test, which uses Coombs’ reagent to cross-link antibodies bound to red blood cells and facilitatehemagglutination.• Some viruses and bacteria will bind and agglutinate red blood cells; this interaction is the basis of the directhemagglutination assay, most often used to determine the titer of virus in solution.• Neutralization assays quantify the level of virus-specific antibody by measuring the decrease inhemagglutination observed after mixing patient serum with a standardized amount of virus.• Hemagglutination assays are also used to screen and cross-match donor and recipient blood to ensure that thetransfusion recipient does not have antibodies to antigens in the donated blood.20.4 EIAs and ELISAs• Enzyme immunoassays (EIA) are used to visualize and quantify antigens. They use an antibody conjugatedto an enzyme to bind the antigen, and the enzyme converts a substrate into an observable end product. Thesubstrate may be either a chromogen or a fluorogen.• Immunostaining is an EIA technique for visualizing cells in a tissue (immunohistochemistry) or examiningintracellular structures (immunocytochemistry).• Direct ELISA is used to quantify an antigen in solution. The primary antibody captures the antigen, and thesecondary antibody delivers an enzyme. Production of end product from the chromogenic substrate is directlyproportional to the amount of captured antigen.• Indirect ELISA is used to detect antibodies in patient serum by attaching antigen to the well of a microtiterplate, allowing the patient (primary) antibody to bind the antigen and an enzyme-conjugated secondaryantibody to detect the primary antibody.• Immunofiltration and immunochromatographic assays are used in lateral flow tests, which can be usedto diagnose pregnancy and various diseases by detecting color-labeled antigen-antibody complexes in urine orother fluid samples20.5 Fluorescent Antibody Techniques• Immunofluorescence assays use antibody-fluorogen conjugates to illuminate antigens for easy, rapiddetection.• Direct immunofluorescence can be used to detect the presence of bacteria in clinical samples such as sputum.• Indirect immunofluorescence detects the presence of antigen-specific antibodies in patient sera. Thefluorescent antibody binds to the antigen-specific antibody rather than the antigen.• The use of indirect immunofluorescence assays to detect antinuclear antibodies is an important tool in thediagnosis of several autoimmune diseases.• Flow cytometry uses fluorescent mAbs against cell-membrane proteins to quantify specific subsets of cellsin complex mixtures.• Fluorescence-activated cell sorters are an extension of flow cytometry in which fluorescence intensity isused to physically separate cells into high and low fluorescence populations.