Chapter 1An Invisible WorldFigure 1.1 A veterinarian gets ready to clean a sea turtle covered in oil following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill inthe Gulf of Mexico in 2010. After the spill, the population of a naturally occurring oil-eating marine bacterium calledAlcanivorax borkumensis skyrocketed, helping to get rid of the oil. Scientists are working on ways to geneticallyengineer this bacterium to be more efficient in cleaning up future spills. (credit: modification of work by NOAA’sNational Ocean Service)Chapter Outline1.1 What Our Ancestors Knew1.2 A Systematic Approach1.3 Types of MicroorganismsIntroductionFrom boiling thermal hot springs to deep beneath the Antarctic ice, microorganisms can be found almost everywhereon earth in great quantities. Microorganisms (or microbes, as they are also called) are small organisms. Most are sosmall that they cannot be seen without a microscope.Most microorganisms are harmless to humans and, in fact, many are helpful. They play fundamental roles inecosystems everywhere on earth, forming the backbone of many food webs. People use them to make biofuels,medicines, and even foods. Without microbes, there would be no bread, cheese, or beer. Our bodies are filled withmicrobes, and our skin alone is home to trillions of them.[1] Some of them we can’t live without; others cause diseasesthat can make us sick or even kill us.Although much more is known today about microbial life than ever before, the vast majority of this invisible worldremains unexplored. Microbiologists continue to identify new ways that microbes benefit and threaten humans.1. J. Hulcr et al. “A Jungle in There: Bacteria in Belly Buttons are Highly Diverse, but Predictable.” PLoS ONE 7 no. 11 (2012): e47712.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047712.Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 151.1 What Our Ancestors KnewLearning Objectives• Describe how our ancestors improved food with the use of invisible microbes• Describe how the causes of sickness and disease were explained in ancient times, prior to the invention of themicroscope• Describe key historical events associated with the birth of microbiologyMost people today, even those who know very little about microbiology, are familiar with the concept of microbes, or“germs,” and their role in human health. Schoolchildren learn about bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms, andmany even view specimens under a microscope. But a few hundred years ago, before the invention of the microscope,the existence of many types of microbes was impossible to prove. By definition, microorganisms, or microbes, arevery small organisms; many types of microbes are too small to see without a microscope, although some parasitesand fungi are visible to the naked eye.Humans have been living with—and using—microorganisms for much longer than they have been able to see them.Historical evidence suggests that humans have had some notion of microbial life since prehistoric times and haveused that knowledge to develop foods as well as prevent and treat disease. In this section, we will explore some of thehistorical applications of microbiology as well as the early beginnings of microbiology as a science.Fermented Foods and BeveragesPeople across the world have enjoyed fermented foods and beverages like beer, wine, bread, yogurt, cheese,and pickled vegetables for all of recorded history. Discoveries from several archeological sites suggest that evenprehistoric people took advantage of fermentation to preserve and enhance the taste of food. Archaeologists studyingpottery jars from a Neolithic village in China found that people were making a fermented beverage from rice, honey,and fruit as early as 7000 BC.[2]Production of these foods and beverages requires microbial fermentation, a process that uses bacteria, mold, or yeastto convert sugars (carbohydrates) to alcohol, gases, and organic acids (Figure 1.3). While it is likely that people firstlearned about fermentation by accident—perhaps by drinking old milk that had curdled or old grape juice that hadfermented—they later learned to harness the power of fermentation to make products like bread, cheese, and wine.Figure 1.3 A microscopic view of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the yeast responsible for making bread rise (left).Yeast is a microorganism. Its cells metabolize the carbohydrates in flour (middle) and produce carbon dioxide, whichcauses the bread to rise (right). (credit middle: modification of work by Janus Sandsgaard; credit right: modification ofwork by “MDreibelbis”/Flickr)2. P.E. McGovern et al. “Fermented Beverages of Pre- and Proto-Historic China.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of theUnited States of America 1 no. 51 (2004):17593–17598. doi:10.1073/pnas.0407921102.16 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Part 1Cora, a 41-year-old lawyer and mother of two, has recently been experiencing severe headaches, a high fever,and a stiff neck. Her husband, who has accompanied Cora to see a doctor, reports that Cora also seemsconfused at times and unusually drowsy. Based on these symptoms, the doctor suspects that Cora may havemeningitis, a potentially life-threatening infection of the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord.Meningitis has several potential causes. It can be brought on by bacteria, fungi, viruses, or even a reactionto medication or exposure to heavy metals. Although people with viral meningitis usually heal on their own,bacterial and fungal meningitis are quite serious and require treatment.Cora’s doctor orders a lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to take three samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fromaround the spinal cord (Figure 1.2). The samples will be sent to laboratories in three different departmentsfor testing: clinical chemistry, microbiology, and hematology. The samples will first be visually examinedto determine whether the CSF is abnormally colored or cloudy; then the CSF will be examined under amicroscope to see if it contains a normal number of red and white blood cells and to check for any abnormalcell types. In the microbiology lab, the specimen will be centrifuged to concentrate any cells in a sediment;this sediment will be smeared on a slide and stained with a Gram stain. Gram staining is a procedure used todifferentiate between two different types of bacteria (gram-positive and gram-negative).About 80% of patients with bacterial meningitis will show bacteria in their CSF with a Gram stain.[3] Cora’sGram stain did not show any bacteria, but her doctor decides to prescribe her antibiotics just in case. Part ofthe CSF sample will be cultured—put in special dishes to see if bacteria or fungi will grow. It takes some timefor most microorganisms to reproduce in sufficient quantities to be detected and analyzed.• What types of microorganisms would be killed by antibiotic treatment?Figure 1.2 (a) A lumbar puncture is used to take a sample of a patient’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing.A needle is inserted between two vertebrae of the lower back, called the lumbar region. (b) CSF should beclear, as in this sample. Abnormally cloudy CSF may indicate an infection but must be tested further toconfirm the presence of microorganisms. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit b: modification of work by James Heilman)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical FocusChapter 1 | An Invisible World 17The Iceman TreatethPrehistoric humans had a very limited understanding of the causes of disease, and various cultures developed differentbeliefs and explanations. While many believed that illness was punishment for angering the gods or was simply theresult of fate, archaeological evidence suggests that prehistoric people attempted to treat illnesses and infections. Oneexample of this is Ötzi the Iceman, a 5300-year-old mummy found frozen in the ice of the Ötzal Alps on the Austrian-Italian border in 1991. Because Ötzi was so well preserved by the ice, researchers discovered that he was infectedwith the eggs of the parasite Trichuris trichiura, which may have caused him to have abdominal pain and anemia.Researchers also found evidence of Borrelia burgdorferi, a bacterium that causes Lyme disease. Some researchersthink Ötzi may have been trying to treat his infections with the woody fruit of the Piptoporus betulinus fungus, whichwas discovered tied to his belongings.[5] This fungus has both laxative and antibiotic properties. Ötzi was also coveredin tattoos that were made by cutting incisions into his skin, filling them with herbs, and then burning the herbs.[6]There is speculation that this may have been another attempt to treat his health ailments.Early Notions of Disease, Contagion, and ContainmentSeveral ancient civilizations appear to have had some understanding that disease could be transmitted by things theycould not see. This is especially evident in historical attempts to contain the spread of disease. For example, the Biblerefers to the practice of quarantining people with leprosy and other diseases, suggesting that people understood thatdiseases could be communicable. Ironically, while leprosy is communicable, it is also a disease that progresses slowly.This means that people were likely quarantined after they had already spread the disease to others.The ancient Greeks attributed disease to bad air, mal’aria, which they called “miasmatic odors.” They developedhygiene practices that built on this idea. The Romans also believed in the miasma hypothesis and created a complexsanitation infrastructure to deal with sewage. In Rome, they built aqueducts, which brought fresh water into thecity, and a giant sewer, the Cloaca Maxima, which carried waste away and into the river Tiber (Figure 1.4). Someresearchers believe that this infrastructure helped protect the Romans from epidemics of waterborne illnesses.3. Rebecca Buxton. “Examination of Gram Stains of Spinal Fluid—Bacterial Meningitis.” American Society for Microbiology. 2007.http://www.microbelibrary.org/library/gram-stain/3065-examination-of-gram-stains-of-spinal-fluid-bacterial-meningitis4. A. Keller et al. “New Insights into the Tyrolean Iceman's Origin and Phenotype as Inferred by Whole-Genome Sequencing.” NatureCommunications, 3 (2012): 698. doi:10.1038/ncomms1701.5. L. Capasso. “5300 Years Ago, the Ice Man Used Natural Laxatives and Antibiotics.” The Lancet, 352 (1998) 9143: 1864. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(05)79939-6.6. L. Capasso, L. “5300 Years Ago, the Ice Man Used Natural Laxatives and Antibiotics.” The Lancet, 352 no. 9143 (1998): 1864. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(05)79939-6.18 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 1.4 (a) The Cloaca Maxima, or “Greatest Sewer” (shown in red), ran through ancient Rome. It was anengineering marvel that carried waste away from the city and into the river Tiber. (b) These ancient latrines emptiedinto the Cloaca Maxima.Even before the invention of the microscope, some doctors, philosophers, and scientists made great strides inunderstanding the invisible forces—what we now know as microbes—that can cause infection, disease, and death.The Greek physician Hippocrates (460–370 BC) is considered the “father ofWestern medicine” (Figure 1.5). Unlikemany of his ancestors and contemporaries, he dismissed the idea that disease was caused by supernatural forces.Instead, he posited that diseases had natural causes from within patients or their environments. Hippocrates and hisheirs are believed to have written the Hippocratic Corpus, a collection of texts that make up some of the oldestsurviving medical books.[7] Hippocrates is also often credited as the author of the Hippocratic Oath, taken by newphysicians to pledge their dedication to diagnosing and treating patients without causing harm.7. G. Pappas et al. “Insights Into Infectious Disease in the Era of Hippocrates.” International Journal of Infectious Diseases 12 (2008)4:347–350. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2007.11.003.Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 19While Hippocrates is considered the father of Western medicine, the Greek philosopher and historian Thucydides(460–395 BC) is considered the father of scientific history because he advocated for evidence-based analysis ofcause-and-effect reasoning (Figure 1.5). Among his most important contributions are his observations regarding theAthenian plague that killed one-third of the population of Athens between 430 and 410 BC. Having survived theepidemic himself, Thucydides made the important observation that survivors did not get re-infected with the disease,even when taking care of actively sick people.[8] This observation shows an early understanding of the concept ofimmunity.Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BC) was a prolific Roman writer who was one of the first people to propose theconcept that things we cannot see (what we now call microorganisms) can cause disease (Figure 1.5). In ResRusticae (On Farming), published in 36 BC, he said that “precautions must also be taken in neighborhood swamps. . . because certain minute creatures [animalia minuta] grow there which cannot be seen by the eye, which float inthe air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and there cause serious diseases.”[9]Figure 1.5 (a) Hippocrates, the “father of Western medicine,” believed that diseases had natural, not supernatural,causes. (b) The historian Thucydides observed that survivors of the Athenian plague were subsequently immune tothe infection. (c) Marcus Terentius Varro proposed that disease could be caused by “certain minute creatures . . .which cannot be seen by the eye.” (credit c: modification of work by Alessandro Antonelli)• Give two examples of foods that have historically been produced by humans with the aid of microbes.• Explain how historical understandings of disease contributed to attempts to treat and contain disease.The Birth of MicrobiologyWhile the ancients may have suspected the existence of invisible “minute creatures,” it wasn’t until the inventionof the microscope that their existence was definitively confirmed. While it is unclear who exactly invented themicroscope, a Dutch cloth merchant named Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) was the first to develop a lenspowerful enough to view microbes. In 1675, using a simple but powerful microscope, Leeuwenhoek was able toobserve single-celled organisms, which he described as “animalcules” or “wee little beasties,” swimming in a drop8. Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War. The Second Book. 431 BC. Translated by Richard Crawley. http://classics.mit.edu/Thucydides/pelopwar.2.second.html.9. Plinio Prioreschi. A History of Medicine: Roman Medicine. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1998: p. 215.20 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5of rain water. From his drawings of these little organisms, we now know he was looking at bacteria and protists. (Wewill explore Leeuwenhoek’s contributions to microscopy further in How We See the Invisible World.)Nearly 200 years after van Leeuwenhoek got his first glimpse of microbes, the “Golden Age of Microbiology”spawned a host of new discoveries between 1857 and 1914. Two famous microbiologists, Louis Pasteur and RobertKoch, were especially active in advancing our understanding of the unseen world of microbes (Figure 1.6). Pasteur,a French chemist, showed that individual microbial strains had unique properties and demonstrated that fermentationis caused by microorganisms. He also invented pasteurization, a process used to kill microorganisms responsible forspoilage, and developed vaccines for the treatment of diseases, including rabies, in animals and humans. Koch, aGerman physician, was the first to demonstrate the connection between a single, isolated microbe and a known humandisease. For example, he discovered the bacteria that cause anthrax (Bacillus anthracis), cholera (Vibrio cholera),and tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis).[10] We will discuss these famous microbiologists, and others, in laterchapters.Figure 1.6 (a) Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) is credited with numerous innovations that advanced the fields ofmicrobiology and immunology. (b) Robert Koch (1843–1910) identified the specific microbes that cause anthrax,cholera, and tuberculosis.As microbiology has developed, it has allowed the broader discipline of biology to grow and flourish in previouslyunimagined ways. Much of what we know about human cells comes from our understanding of microbes, and manyof the tools we use today to study cells and their genetics derive from work with microbes.• How did the discovery of microbes change human understanding of disease?10. S.M. Blevins and M.S. Bronze. “Robert Koch and the ‘Golden Age’ of Bacteriology.” International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 14no. 9 (2010): e744-e751. doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2009.12.003.Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 21Microbiology ToolboxBecause individual microbes are generally too small to be seen with the naked eye, the science of microbiologyis dependent on technology that can artificially enhance the capacity of our natural senses of perception. Earlymicrobiologists like Pasteur and Koch had fewer tools at their disposal than are found in modern laboratories,making their discoveries and innovations that much more impressive. Later chapters of this text will exploremany applications of technology in depth, but for now, here is a brief overview of some of the fundamentaltools of the microbiology lab.• Microscopes produce magnified images of microorganisms, human cells and tissues, and many othertypes of specimens too small to be observed with the naked eye.• Stains and dyes are used to add color to microbes so they can be better observed under amicroscope. Some dyes can be used on living microbes, whereas others require that the specimensbe fixed with chemicals or heat before staining. Some stains only work on certain types of microbesbecause of differences in their cellular chemical composition.• Growth media are used to grow microorganisms in a lab setting. Some media are liquids; others aremore solid or gel-like. A growth medium provides nutrients, including water, various salts, a source ofcarbon (like glucose), and a source of nitrogen and amino acids (like yeast extract) so microorganismscan grow and reproduce. Ingredients in a growth medium can be modified to grow unique types ofmicroorganisms.• A Petri dish is a flat-lidded dish that is typically 10–11 centimeters (cm) in diameter and 1–1.5 cm high.Petri dishes made out of either plastic or glass are used to hold growth media (Figure 1.7).• Test tubes are cylindrical plastic or glass tubes with rounded bottoms and open tops. They can beused to grow microbes in broth, or semisolid or solid growth media.• A Bunsen burner is a metal apparatus that creates a flame that can be used to sterilize pieces ofequipment. A rubber tube carries gas (fuel) to the burner. In many labs, Bunsen burners are beingphased out in favor of infrared microincinerators, which serve a similar purpose without the safetyrisks of an open flame.• An inoculation loop is a handheld tool that ends in a small wire loop (Figure 1.7). The loop can beused to streak microorganisms on agar in a Petri dish or to transfer them from one test tube to another.Before each use, the inoculation loop must be sterilized so cultures do not become contaminated.Micro Connections22 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 1.7 (a) This Petri dish filled with agar has been streaked with Legionella, the bacterium responsiblefor causing Legionnaire’s disease. (b) An inoculation loop like this one can be used to streak bacteria on agarin a Petri dish. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:modification of work by Jeffrey M. Vinocur)1.2 A Systematic ApproachLearning Objectives• Describe how microorganisms are classified and distinguished as unique species• Compare historical and current systems of taxonomy used to classify microorganismsOnce microbes became visible to humans with the help of microscopes, scientists began to realize their enormousdiversity. Microorganisms vary in all sorts of ways, including their size, their appearance, and their rates ofreproduction. To study this incredibly diverse new array of organisms, researchers needed a way to systematicallyorganize them.The Science of TaxonomyTaxonomy is the classification, description, identification, and naming of living organisms. Classification is thepractice of organizing organisms into different groups based on their shared characteristics. The most famousearly taxonomist was a Swedish botanist, zoologist, and physician named Carolus Linnaeus (1701–1778). In 1735,Linnaeus published Systema Naturae, an 11-page booklet in which he proposed the Linnaean taxonomy, a systemof categorizing and naming organisms using a standard format so scientists could discuss organisms using consistentterminology. He continued to revise and add to the book, which grew into multiple volumes (Figure 1.8).Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 23Figure 1.8 Swedish botanist, zoologist, and physician Carolus Linnaeus developed a new system for categorizingplants and animals. In this 1853 portrait by Hendrik Hollander, Linnaeus is holding a twinflower, named Linnaeaborealis in his honor.In his taxonomy, Linnaeus divided the natural world into three kingdoms: animal, plant, and mineral (the mineralkingdom was later abandoned). Within the animal and plant kingdoms, he grouped organisms using a hierarchy ofincreasingly specific levels and sublevels based on their similarities. The names of the levels in Linnaeus’s originaltaxonomy were kingdom, class, order, family, genus (plural: genera), and species. Species was, and continues to be,the most specific and basic taxonomic unit.Evolving Trees of Life (Phylogenies)With advances in technology, other scientists gradually made refinements to the Linnaean system and eventuallycreated new systems for classifying organisms. In the 1800s, there was a growing interest in developing taxonomiesthat took into account the evolutionary relationships, or phylogenies, of all different species of organisms on earth.One way to depict these relationships is via a diagram called a phylogenetic tree (or tree of life). In these diagrams,groups of organisms are arranged by how closely related they are thought to be. In early phylogenetic trees, therelatedness of organisms was inferred by their visible similarities, such as the presence or absence of hair or thenumber of limbs. Now, the analysis is more complicated. Today, phylogenic analyses include genetic, biochemical,and embryological comparisons, as will be discussed later in this chapter.Linnaeus’s tree of life contained just two main branches for all living things: the animal and plant kingdoms. In 1866,Ernst Haeckel, a German biologist, philosopher, and physician, proposed another kingdom, Protista, for unicellularorganisms (Figure 1.9). He later proposed a fourth kingdom, Monera, for unicellular organisms whose cells lacknuclei, like bacteria.24 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 1.9 Ernst Haeckel’s rendering of the tree of life, from his 1866 book General Morphology of Organisms,contained three kingdoms: Plantae, Protista, and Animalia. He later added a fourth kingdom, Monera, for unicellularorganisms lacking a nucleus.Nearly 100 years later, in 1969, American ecologist Robert Whittaker (1920–1980) proposed adding anotherkingdom—Fungi—in his tree of life. Whittaker’s tree also contained a level of categorization above the kingdomlevel—the empire or superkingdom level—to distinguish between organisms that have membrane-bound nuclei intheir cells (eukaryotes) and those that do not (prokaryotes). Empire Prokaryota contained just the Kingdom Monera.The Empire Eukaryota contained the other four kingdoms: Fungi, Protista, Plantae, and Animalia. Whittaker’s fivekingdomtree was considered the standard phylogeny for many years.Figure 1.10 shows how the tree of life has changed over time. Note that viruses are not found in any of these trees.That is because they are not made up of cells and thus it is difficult to determine where they would fit into a tree oflife.Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 25Figure 1.10 This timeline shows how the shape of the tree of life has changed over the centuries. Even today, thetaxonomy of living organisms is continually being reevaluated and refined with advances in technology.• Briefly summarize how our evolving understanding of microorganisms has contributed to changes in the waythat organisms are classified.Part 2Antibiotic drugs are specifically designed to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria. But after a couple of days onantibiotics, Cora shows no signs of improvement. Also, her CSF cultures came back from the lab negative.Since bacteria or fungi were not isolated from Cora’s CSF sample, her doctor rules out bacterial and fungalmeningitis. Viral meningitis is still a possibility.However, Cora now reports some troubling new symptoms. She is starting to have difficulty walking. Hermuscle stiffness has spread from her neck to the rest of her body, and her limbs sometimes jerk involuntarily.In addition, Cora’s cognitive symptoms are worsening. At this point, Cora’s doctor becomes very concernedand orders more tests on the CSF samples.• What types of microorganisms could be causing Cora’s symptoms?Clinical Focus26 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.The Role of Genetics in Modern TaxonomyHaeckel’s and Whittaker’s trees presented hypotheses about the phylogeny of different organisms based on readilyobservable characteristics. But the advent of molecular genetics in the late 20th century revealed other ways toorganize phylogenetic trees. Genetic methods allow for a standardized way to compare all living organisms withoutrelying on observable characteristics that can often be subjective. Modern taxonomy relies heavily on comparing thenucleic acids (deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA] or ribonucleic acid [RNA]) or proteins from different organisms. Themore similar the nucleic acids and proteins are between two organisms, the more closely related they are consideredto be.In the 1970s, American microbiologist Carl Woese discovered what appeared to be a “living record” of the evolutionof organisms. He and his collaborator George Fox created a genetics-based tree of life based on similarities anddifferences they observed in the gene sequences coding for small subunit ribosomal RNA (rRNA) of differentorganisms. In the process, they discovered that a certain type of bacteria, called archaebacteria (now known simply asarchaea), were significantly different from other bacteria and eukaryotes in terms of their small subunit rRNA genesequences. To accommodate this difference, they created a tree with three Domains above the level of Kingdom:Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (Figure 1.11). Analysis of small subunit rRNA gene sequences suggests archaea,bacteria, and eukaryotes all evolved from a common ancestral cell type. The tree is skewed to show a closerevolutionary relationship between Archaea and Eukarya than they have to Bacteria.Figure 1.11 Woese and Fox’s phylogenetic tree contains three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. DomainsArchaea and Bacteria contain all prokaryotic organisms, and Eukarya contains all eukaryotic organisms. (credit:modification of work by Eric Gaba)Scientists continue to use analysis of RNA, DNA, and proteins to determine how organisms are related. Oneinteresting, and complicating, discovery is that of horizontal gene transfer—when a gene of one species is absorbedinto another organism’s genome. Horizontal gene transfer is especially common in microorganisms and can make itdifficult to determine how organisms are evolutionarily related. Consequently, some scientists now think in terms of“webs of life” rather than “trees of life.”Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 27• In modern taxonomy, how do scientists determine how closely two organisms are related?• Explain why the branches on the “tree of life” all originate from a single “trunk.”Naming MicrobesIn developing his taxonomy, Linnaeus used a system of binomial nomenclature, a two-word naming system foridentifying organisms by genus and species. For example, modern humans are in the genus Homo and have the speciesname sapiens, so their scientific name in binomial nomenclature is Homo sapiens. In binomial nomenclature, thegenus part of the name is always capitalized; it is followed by the species name, which is not capitalized. Both namesare italicized.Taxonomic names in the 18th through 20th centuries were typically derived from Latin, since that was the commonlanguage used by scientists when taxonomic systems were first created. Today, newly discovered organisms canbe given names derived from Latin, Greek, or English. Sometimes these names reflect some distinctive trait ofthe organism; in other cases, microorganisms are named after the scientists who discovered them. The archaeonHaloquadratum walsbyi is an example of both of these naming schemes. The genus, Haloquadratum, describesthe microorganism’s saltwater habitat (halo is derived from the Greek word for “salt”) as well as the arrangementof its square cells, which are arranged in square clusters of four cells (quadratum is Latin for “foursquare”).The species, walsbyi, is named after Anthony Edward Walsby, the microbiologist who discovered Haloquadratumwalsbyi in in 1980. While it might seem easier to give an organism a common descriptive name—like a redheadedwoodpecker—we can imagine how that could become problematic. What happens when another species ofwoodpecker with red head coloring is discovered? The systematic nomenclature scientists use eliminates this potentialproblem by assigning each organism a single, unique two-word name that is recognized by scientists all over theworld.In this text, we will typically abbreviate an organism’s genus and species after its first mention. The abbreviatedform is simply the first initial of the genus, followed by a period and the full name of the species. For example, thebacterium Escherichia coli is shortened to E. coli in its abbreviated form. You will encounter this same convention inother scientific texts as well.Bergey’s ManualsWhether in a tree or a web, microbes can be difficult to identify and classify. Without easily observable macroscopicfeatures like feathers, feet, or fur, scientists must capture, grow, and devise ways to study their biochemical propertiesto differentiate and classify microbes. Despite these hurdles, a group of microbiologists created and updated a setof manuals for identifying and classifying microorganisms. First published in 1923 and since updated many times,Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology and Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology are the standardreferences for identifying and classifying different prokaryotes. (Appendix D of this textbook is partly basedon Bergey’s manuals; it shows how the organisms that appear in this textbook are classified.) Because so manybacteria look identical, methods based on nonvisual characteristics must be used to identify them. For example,biochemical tests can be used to identify chemicals unique to certain species. Likewise, serological tests can be usedto identify specific antibodies that will react against the proteins found in certain species. Ultimately, DNA and rRNAsequencing can be used both for identifying a particular bacterial species and for classifying newly discovered species.• What is binomial nomenclature and why is it a useful tool for naming organisms?28 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain why a resource like one of Bergey’s manuals would be helpful in identifying a microorganism in asample.Same Name, Different StrainWithin one species of microorganism, there can be several subtypes called strains. While different strainsmay be nearly identical genetically, they can have very different attributes. The bacterium Escherichia coli isinfamous for causing food poisoning and traveler’s diarrhea. However, there are actually many different strainsof E. coli, and they vary in their ability to cause disease.One pathogenic (disease-causing) E. coli strain that you may have heard of is E. coli O157:H7. In humans,infection from E. coli O157:H7 can cause abdominal cramps and diarrhea. Infection usually originates fromcontaminated water or food, particularly raw vegetables and undercooked meat. In the 1990s, there wereseveral large outbreaks of E. coli O157:H7 thought to have originated in undercooked hamburgers.While E. coli O157:H7 and some other strains have given E. coli a bad name, most E. coli strains do not causedisease. In fact, some can be helpful. Different strains of E. coli found naturally in our gut help us digest ourfood, provide us with some needed chemicals, and fight against pathogenic microbes.Learn more about phylogenetic trees by exploring the Wellcome Trust’sinteractive Tree of Life. The website (https://www.openstax.org/l/22wellcome)contains information, photos, and animations about many different organisms.Select two organisms to see how they are evolutionarily related.1.3 Types of MicroorganismsLearning Objectives• List the various types of microorganisms and describe their defining characteristics• Give examples of different types of cellular and viral microorganisms and infectious agents• Describe the similarities and differences between archaea and bacteria• Provide an overview of the field of microbiologyMost microbes are unicellular and small enough that they require artificial magnification to be seen. However,there are some unicellular microbes that are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular organisms that aremicroscopic. An object must measure about 100 micrometers (μm) to be visible without a microscope, but mostmicroorganisms are many times smaller than that. For some perspective, consider that a typical animal cell measuresroughly 10 μm across but is still microscopic. Bacterial cells are typically about 1 μm, and viruses can be 10 timessmaller than bacteria (Figure 1.12). See Table 1.1 for units of length used in microbiology.Micro ConnectionsLink to LearningChapter 1 | An Invisible World 29Figure 1.12 The relative sizes of various microscopic and nonmicroscopic objects. Note that a typical virusmeasures about 100 nm, 10 times smaller than a typical bacterium (~1 μm), which is at least 10 times smaller than atypical plant or animal cell (~10–100 μm). An object must measure about 100 μm to be visible without a microscope.Units of Length Commonly Used in MicrobiologyMetric Unit Meaning of Prefix Metric Equivalentmeter (m) — 1 m = 100 mdecimeter (dm) 1/10 1 dm = 0.1 m = 10−1 mcentimeter (cm) 1/100 1 cm = 0.01 m = 10−2 mmillimeter (mm) 1/1000 1 mm = 0.001 m = 10−3 mmicrometer (μm) 1/1,000,000 1 μm = 0.000001 m = 10−6 mnanometer (nm) 1/1,000,000,000 1 nm = 0.000000001 m = 10−9 mTable 1.1Microorganisms differ from each other not only in size, but also in structure, habitat, metabolism, and many othercharacteristics. While we typically think of microorganisms as being unicellular, there are also many multicellularorganisms that are too small to be seen without a microscope. Some microbes, such as viruses, are even acellular (notcomposed of cells).Microorganisms are found in each of the three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. Microbes withinthe domains Bacteria and Archaea are all prokaryotes (their cells lack a nucleus), whereas microbes in the domainEukarya are eukaryotes (their cells have a nucleus). Some microorganisms, such as viruses, do not fall within anyof the three domains of life. In this section, we will briefly introduce each of the broad groups of microbes. Laterchapters will go into greater depth about the diverse species within each group.30 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5How big is a bacterium or a virus compared to other objects? Check out thisinteractive website (https://www.openstax.org/l/22relsizes) to get a feel forthe scale of different microorganisms.Prokaryotic MicroorganismsBacteria are found in nearly every habitat on earth, including within and on humans. Most bacteria are harmless orhelpful, but some are pathogens, causing disease in humans and other animals. Bacteria are prokaryotic because theirgenetic material (DNA) is not housed within a true nucleus. Most bacteria have cell walls that contain peptidoglycan.Bacteria are often described in terms of their general shape. Common shapes include spherical (coccus), rod-shaped(bacillus), or curved (spirillum, spirochete, or vibrio). Figure 1.13 shows examples of these shapes.Figure 1.13 Common bacterial shapes. Note how coccobacillus is a combination of spherical (coccus) and rodshaped(bacillus). (credit “Coccus”: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit “Coccobacillus”: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;credit “Spirochete”: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)They have a wide range of metabolic capabilities and can grow in a variety of environments, using differentcombinations of nutrients. Some bacteria are photosynthetic, such as oxygenic cyanobacteria and anoxygenic greensulfur and green nonsulfur bacteria; these bacteria use energy derived from sunlight, and fix carbon dioxide forgrowth. Other types of bacteria are nonphotosynthetic, obtaining their energy from organic or inorganic compoundsin their environment.Archaea are also unicellular prokaryotic organisms. Archaea and bacteria have different evolutionary histories,as well as significant differences in genetics, metabolic pathways, and the composition of their cell walls andmembranes. Unlike most bacteria, archaeal cell walls do not contain peptidoglycan, but their cell walls are oftencomposed of a similar substance called pseudopeptidoglycan. Like bacteria, archaea are found in nearly every habitaton earth, even extreme environments that are very cold, very hot, very basic, or very acidic (Figure 1.14). Somearchaea live in the human body, but none have been shown to be human pathogens.Link to LearningChapter 1 | An Invisible World 31Figure 1.14 Some archaea live in extreme environments, such as the Morning Glory pool, a hot spring inYellowstone National Park. The color differences in the pool result from the different communities of microbes that areable to thrive at various water temperatures.• What are the two main types of prokaryotic organisms?• Name some of the defining characteristics of each type.Eukaryotic MicroorganismsThe domain Eukarya contains all eukaryotes, including uni- or multicellular eukaryotes such as protists, fungi, plants,and animals. The major defining characteristic of eukaryotes is that their cells contain a nucleus.ProtistsProtists are an informal grouping of eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, or fungi. Algae and protozoa areexamples of protists.Algae (singular: alga) are protists that can be either unicellular or multicellular and vary widely in size, appearance,and habitat (Figure 1.15). Their cells are surrounded by cell walls made of cellulose, a type of carbohydrate.Algae are photosynthetic organisms that extract energy from the sun and release oxygen and carbohydrates into theirenvironment. Because other organisms can use their waste products for energy, algae are important parts of manyecosystems. Many consumer products contain ingredients derived from algae, such as carrageenan or alginic acid,which are found in some brands of ice cream, salad dressing, beverages, lipstick, and toothpaste. A derivative of algaealso plays a prominent role in the microbiology laboratory. Agar, a gel derived from algae, can be mixed with variousnutrients and used to grow microorganisms in a Petri dish. Algae are also being developed as a possible source forbiofuels.32 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 1.15 Assorted diatoms, a kind of algae, live in annual sea ice in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Diatoms rangein size from 2 μm to 200 μm and are visualized here using light microscopy. (credit: modification of work by NationalOceanic and Atmospheric Administration)Protozoa (singular: protozoan) are protists that make up the backbone of many food webs by providing nutrients forother organisms. Protozoa are very diverse. Some protozoa move with help from hair-like structures called cilia orwhip-like structures called flagella. Others extend part of their cell membrane and cytoplasm to propel themselvesforward. These cytoplasmic extensions are called pseudopods (“false feet”). Some protozoa are photosynthetic; othersfeed on organic material. Some are free-living, whereas others are parasitic, only able to survive by extractingnutrients from a host organism. Most protozoa are harmless, but some are pathogens that can cause disease in animalsor humans (Figure 1.16).Figure 1.16 Giardia lamblia, an intestinal protozoan parasite that infects humans and other mammals, causingsevere diarrhea. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)FungiFungi (singular: fungus) are also eukaryotes. Some multicellular fungi, such as mushrooms, resemble plants, but theyare actually quite different. Fungi are not photosynthetic, and their cell walls are usually made out of chitin ratherthan cellulose.Unicellular fungi—yeasts—are included within the study of microbiology. There are more than 1000 known species.Yeasts are found in many different environments, from the deep sea to the human navel. Some yeasts have beneficialChapter 1 | An Invisible World 33uses, such as causing bread to rise and beverages to ferment; but yeasts can also cause food to spoil. Some even causediseases, such as vaginal yeast infections and oral thrush (Figure 1.17).Figure 1.17 Candida albicans is a unicellular fungus, or yeast. It is the causative agent of vaginal yeast infections aswell as oral thrush, a yeast infection of the mouth that commonly afflicts infants. C. albicans has a morphology similarto that of coccus bacteria; however, yeast is a eukaryotic organism (note the nuclei) and is much larger. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Other fungi of interest to microbiologists are multicellular organisms called molds. Molds are made up of longfilaments that form visible colonies (Figure 1.18). Molds are found in many different environments, from soil torotting food to dank bathroom corners. Molds play a critical role in the decomposition of dead plants and animals.Some molds can cause allergies, and others produce disease-causing metabolites called mycotoxins. Molds have beenused to make pharmaceuticals, including penicillin, which is one of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics, andcyclosporine, used to prevent organ rejection following a transplant.Figure 1.18 Large colonies of microscopic fungi can often be observed with the naked eye, as seen on the surfaceof these moldy oranges.• Name two types of protists and two types of fungi.34 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Name some of the defining characteristics of each type.HelminthsMulticellular parasitic worms called helminths are not technically microorganisms, as most are large enough tosee without a microscope. However, these worms fall within the field of microbiology because diseases caused byhelminths involve microscopic eggs and larvae. One example of a helminth is the guinea worm, or Dracunculusmedinensis, which causes dizziness, vomiting, diarrhea, and painful ulcers on the legs and feet when the worm worksits way out of the skin (Figure 1.19). Infection typically occurs after a person drinks water containing water fleasinfected by guinea-worm larvae. In the mid-1980s, there were an estimated 3.5 million cases of guinea-worm disease,but the disease has been largely eradicated. In 2014, there were only 126 cases reported, thanks to the coordinatedefforts of the World Health Organization (WHO) and other groups committed to improvements in drinking watersanitation.[11][12]Figure 1.19 (a) The beef tapeworm, Taenia saginata, infects both cattle and humans. T. saginata eggs aremicroscopic (around 50 μm), but adult worms like the one shown here can reach 4–10 m, taking up residence in thedigestive system. (b) An adult guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis, is removed through a lesion in the patient’sskin by winding it around a matchstick. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)VirusesViruses are acellular microorganisms, which means they are not composed of cells. Essentially, a virus consistsof proteins and genetic material—either DNA or RNA, but never both—that are inert outside of a host organism.However, by incorporating themselves into a host cell, viruses are able to co-opt the host’s cellular mechanisms tomultiply and infect other hosts.Viruses can infect all types of cells, from human cells to the cells of other microorganisms. In humans, viruses areresponsible for numerous diseases, from the common cold to deadly Ebola (Figure 1.20). However, many virusesdo not cause disease.11. C. Greenaway “Dracunculiasis (Guinea Worm Disease).” Canadian Medical Association Journal 170 no. 4 (2004):495–500.12. World Health Organization. “Dracunculiasis (Guinea-Worm Disease).” WHO. 2015. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs359/en/. Accessed October 2, 2015.Chapter 1 | An Invisible World 35Figure 1.20 (a) Members of the Coronavirus family can cause respiratory infections like the common cold, severeacute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). Here they are viewed under atransmission electron microscope (TEM). (b) Ebolavirus, a member of the Filovirus family, as visualized using a TEM.(credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work byThomas W. Geisbert)• Are helminths microorganisms? Explain why or why not.• How are viruses different from other microorganisms?Microbiology as a Field of StudyMicrobiology is a broad term that encompasses the study of all different types of microorganisms. But in practice,microbiologists tend to specialize in one of several subfields. For example, bacteriology is the study of bacteria;mycology is the study of fungi; protozoology is the study of protozoa; parasitology is the study of helminths andother parasites; and virology is the study of viruses (Figure 1.21). Immunology, the study of the immune system,is often included in the study of microbiology because host–pathogen interactions are central to our understandingof infectious disease processes. Microbiologists can also specialize in certain areas of microbiology, such as clinicalmicrobiology, environmental microbiology, applied microbiology, or food microbiology.In this textbook, we are primarily concerned with clinical applications of microbiology, but since the various subfieldsof microbiology are highly interrelated, we will often discuss applications that are not strictly clinical.36 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 1.21 A virologist samples eggs from this nest to be tested for the influenza A virus, which causes avian flu inbirds. (credit: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)Bioethics in MicrobiologyIn the 1940s, the U.S. government was looking for a solution to a medical problem: the prevalence of sexuallytransmitted diseases (STDs) among soldiers. Several now-infamous government-funded studies used humansubjects to research common STDs and treatments. In one such study, American researchers intentionallyexposed more than 1300 human subjects in Guatemala to syphilis, gonorrhea, and chancroid to determine theability of penicillin and other antibiotics to combat these diseases. Subjects of the study included Guatemalansoldiers, prisoners, prostitutes, and psychiatric patients—none of whom were informed that they were takingpart in the study. Researchers exposed subjects to STDs by various methods, from facilitating intercourse withinfected prostitutes to inoculating subjects with the bacteria known to cause the diseases. This latter methodinvolved making a small wound on the subject’s genitals or elsewhere on the body, and then putting bacteriadirectly into the wound.[13] In 2011, a U.S. government commission tasked with investigating the experimentrevealed that only some of the subjects were treated with penicillin, and 83 subjects died by 1953, likely as aresult of the study.[14]Unfortunately, this is one of many horrific examples of microbiology experiments that have violated basicethical standards. Even if this study had led to a life-saving medical breakthrough (it did not), few would arguethat its methods were ethically sound or morally justifiable. But not every case is so clear cut. Professionalsworking in clinical settings are frequently confronted with ethical dilemmas, such as working with patients whodecline a vaccine or life-saving blood transfusion. These are just two examples of life-and-death decisions thatEye on EthicsChapter 1 | An Invisible World 37may intersect with the religious and philosophical beliefs of both the patient and the health-care professional.No matter how noble the goal, microbiology studies and clinical practice must be guided by a certain set ofethical principles. Studies must be done with integrity. Patients and research subjects provide informed consent(not only agreeing to be treated or studied but demonstrating an understanding of the purpose of the study andany risks involved). Patients’ rights must be respected. Procedures must be approved by an institutional reviewboard. When working with patients, accurate record-keeping, honest communication, and confidentiality areparamount. Animals used for research must be treated humanely, and all protocols must be approved by aninstitutional animal care and use committee. These are just a few of the ethical principles explored in the Eyeon Ethics boxes throughout this book.ResolutionCora’s CSF samples show no signs of inflammation or infection, as would be expected with a viral infection.However, there is a high concentration of a particular protein, 14-3-3 protein, in her CSF. Anelectroencephalogram (EEG) of her brain function is also abnormal. The EEG resembles that of a patient with aneurodegenerative disease like Alzheimer’s or Huntington’s, but Cora’s rapid cognitive decline is not consistentwith either of these. Instead, her doctor concludes that Cora has Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), a type oftransmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE).CJD is an extremely rare disease, with only about 300 cases in the United States each year. It is not causedby a bacterium, fungus, or virus, but rather by prions—which do not fit neatly into any particular category ofmicrobe. Like viruses, prions are not found on the tree of life because they are acellular. Prions are extremelysmall, about one-tenth the size of a typical virus. They contain no genetic material and are composed solely ofa type of abnormal protein.CJD can have several different causes. It can be acquired through exposure to the brain or nervoussystemtissue of an infected person or animal. Consuming meat from an infected animal is one way suchexposure can occur. There have also been rare cases of exposure to CJD through contact with contaminatedsurgical equipment[15] and from cornea and growth-hormone donors who unknowingly had CJD.[16][17] In rarecases, the disease results from a specific genetic mutation that can sometimes be hereditary. However, inapproximately 85% of patients with CJD, the cause of the disease is spontaneous (or sporadic) and has noidentifiable cause.[18] Based on her symptoms and their rapid progression, Cora is diagnosed with sporadicCJD.Unfortunately for Cora, CJD is a fatal disease for which there is no approved treatment. Approximately 90%of patients die within 1 year of diagnosis.[19] Her doctors focus on limiting her pain and cognitive symptoms asher disease progresses. Eight months later, Cora dies. Her CJD diagnosis is confirmed with a brain autopsy.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus13. Kara Rogers. “Guatemala Syphilis Experiment: American Medical Research Project”. Encylopaedia Britannica.http://www.britannica.com/event/Guatemala-syphilis-experiment. Accessed June 24, 2015.14. Susan Donaldson James. “Syphilis Experiments Shock, But So Do Third-World Drug Trials.” ABC World News. August 30, 2011.http://abcnews.go.com/Health/guatemala-syphilis-experiments-shock-us-drug-trials-exploit/story?id=14414902. Accessed June 24, 2015.15. Greg Botelho. “Case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Confirmed in New Hampshire.” CNN. 2013. http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/20/health/creutzfeldt-jakob-brain-disease/.16. P. Rudge et al. “Iatrogenic CJD Due to Pituitary-Derived Growth Hormone With Genetically Determined Incubation Times of Up to 40Years.” Brain 138 no. 11 (2015): 3386–3399.17. J.G. Heckmann et al. “Transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease via a Corneal Transplant.” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &Psychiatry 63 no. 3 (1997): 388–390.38 Chapter 1 | An Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Summary1.1 What Our Ancestors Knew• Microorganisms (or microbes) are living organisms that are generally too small to be seen without amicroscope.• Throughout history, humans have used microbes to make fermented foods such as beer, bread, cheese, andwine.• Long before the invention of the microscope, some people theorized that infection and disease were spreadby living things that were too small to be seen. They also correctly intuited certain principles regarding thespread of disease and immunity.• Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, using a microscope, was the first to actually describe observations of bacteria, in1675.• During the Golden Age of Microbiology (1857–1914), microbiologists, including Louis Pasteur and RobertKoch, discovered many new connections between the fields of microbiology and medicine.1.2 A Systematic Approach• Carolus Linnaeus developed a taxonomic system for categorizing organisms into related groups.• Binomial nomenclature assigns organisms Latinized scientific names with a genus and species designation.• A phylogenetic tree is a way of showing how different organisms are thought to be related to one anotherfrom an evolutionary standpoint.• The first phylogenetic tree contained kingdoms for plants and animals; Ernst Haeckel proposed addingkingdom for protists.• Robert Whittaker’s tree contained five kingdoms: Animalia, Plantae, Protista, Fungi, and Monera.• Carl Woese used small subunit ribosomal RNA to create a phylogenetic tree that groups organisms into threedomains based on their genetic similarity.• Bergey’s manuals of determinative and systemic bacteriology are the standard references for identifying andclassifying bacteria, respectively.• Bacteria can be identified through biochemical tests, DNA/RNA analysis, and serological testing methods.1.3 Types of Microorganisms• Microorganisms are very diverse and are found in all three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya.• Archaea and bacteria are classified as prokaryotes because they lack a cellular nucleus. Archaea differ frombacteria in evolutionary history, genetics, metabolic pathways, and cell wall and membrane composition.• Archaea inhabit nearly every environment on earth, but no archaea have been identified as human pathogens.• Eukaryotes studied in microbiology include algae, protozoa, fungi, and helminths.• Algae are plant-like organisms that can be either unicellular or multicellular, and derive energy viaphotosynthesis.• Protozoa are unicellular organisms with complex cell structures; most are motile.• Microscopic fungi include molds and yeasts.• Helminths are multicellular parasitic worms. They are included in the field of microbiology because theireggs and larvae are often microscopic.• Viruses are acellular microorganisms that require a host to reproduce.• The field of microbiology is extremely broad. Microbiologists typically specialize in one of many subfields,but all health professionals need a solid foundation in clinical microbiology.18. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” NIH. 2015. http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/cjd/detail_cjd.htm#288133058.19. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” NIH. 2015. http://www.ninds.nih.gov/