Chapter 15Microbial Mechanisms ofPathogenicityFigure 15.1 Although medical professionals rely heavily on signs and symptoms to diagnose disease and prescribetreatment, many diseases can produce similar signs and symptoms. (credit left: modification of work by U.S. Navy)Chapter Outline15.1 Characteristics of Infectious Disease15.2 How Pathogens Cause Disease15.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens15.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic PathogensIntroductionJane woke up one spring morning feeling not quite herself. Her throat felt a bit dry and she was sniffling. Shewondered why she felt so lousy. Was it because of a change in the weather? The pollen count? Was she coming downwith something? Did she catch a bug from her coworker who sneezed on her in the elevator yesterday?The signs and symptoms we associate with illness can have many different causes. Sometimes they are the directresult of a pathogenic infection, but in other cases they result from a response by our immune system to a pathogenor another perceived threat. For example, in response to certain pathogens, the immune system may release pyrogens,chemicals that cause the body temperature to rise, resulting in a fever. This response creates a less-than-favorableenvironment for the pathogen, but it also makes us feel sick.Medical professionals rely heavily on analysis of signs and symptoms to determine the cause of an ailment andprescribe treatment. In some cases, signs and symptoms alone are enough to correctly identify the causative agent ofa disease, but since few diseases produce truly unique symptoms, it is often necessary to confirm the identity of theinfectious agent by other direct and indirect diagnostic methods.Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 66115.1 Characteristics of Infectious DiseaseLearning Objectives• Distinguish between signs and symptoms of disease• Explain the difference between a communicable disease and a noncommunicable disease• Compare different types of infectious diseases, including iatrogenic, nosocomial, and zoonotic diseases• Identify and describe the stages of an acute infectious disease in terms of number of pathogens present andseverity of signs and symptomsA disease is any condition in which the normal structure or functions of the body are damaged or impaired. Physicalinjuries or disabilities are not classified as disease, but there can be several causes for disease, including infection by apathogen, genetics (as in many cancers or deficiencies), noninfectious environmental causes, or inappropriate immuneresponses. Our focus in this chapter will be on infectious diseases, although when diagnosing infectious diseases, it isalways important to consider possible noninfectious causes.Signs and Symptoms of DiseaseAn infection is the successful colonization of a host by a microorganism. Infections can lead to disease, which causessigns and symptoms resulting in a deviation from the normal structure or functioning of the host. Microorganisms thatcan cause disease are known as pathogens.The signs of disease are objective and measurable, and can be directly observed by a clinician. Vital signs, which areused to measure the body’s basic functions, include body temperature (normally 37 °C [98.6 °F]), heart rate (normally60–100 beats per minute), breathing rate (normally 12–18 breaths per minute), and blood pressure (normally between90/60 and 120/80 mm Hg). Changes in any of the body’s vital signs may be indicative of disease. For example, havinga fever (a body temperature significantly higher than 37 °C or 98.6 °F) is a sign of disease because it can be measured.In addition to changes in vital signs, other observable conditions may be considered signs of disease. For example,the presence of antibodies in a patient’s serum (the liquid portion of blood that lacks clotting factors) can be observedand measured through blood tests and, therefore, can be considered a sign. However, it is important to note that thepresence of antibodies is not always a sign of an active disease. Antibodies can remain in the body long after aninfection has resolved; also, they may develop in response to a pathogen that is in the body but not currently causingdisease.Part 1Michael, a 10-year-old boy in generally good health, went to a birthday party on Sunday with his family. He atemany different foods but was the only one in the family to eat the undercooked hot dogs served by the hosts.Monday morning, he woke up feeling achy and nauseous, and he was running a fever of 38 °C (100.4 °F). Hisparents, assuming Michael had caught the flu, made him stay home from school and limited his activities. Butafter 4 days, Michael began to experience severe headaches, and his fever spiked to 40 °C (104 °F). Growingworried, his parents finally decide to take Michael to a nearby clinic.• What signs and symptoms is Michael experiencing?• What do these signs and symptoms tell us about the stage of Michael’s disease?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus662 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Unlike signs, symptoms of disease are subjective. Symptoms are felt or experienced by the patient, but they cannot beclinically confirmed or objectively measured. Examples of symptoms include nausea, loss of appetite, and pain. Suchsymptoms are important to consider when diagnosing disease, but they are subject to memory bias and are difficultto measure precisely. Some clinicians attempt to quantify symptoms by asking patients to assign a numerical valueto their symptoms. For example, the Wong-Baker Faces pain-rating scale asks patients to rate their pain on a scaleof 0–10. An alternative method of quantifying pain is measuring skin conductance fluctuations. These fluctuationsreflect sweating due to skin sympathetic nerve activity resulting from the stressor of pain.[1]A specific group of signs and symptoms characteristic of a particular disease is called a syndrome. Many syndromesare named using a nomenclature based on signs and symptoms or the location of the disease. Table 15.1 lists someof the prefixes and suffixes commonly used in naming syndromes.Nomenclature of SymptomsAffix Meaning Examplecyto- cell cytopenia: reduction in the number of blood cellshepat- of the liver hepatitis: inflammation of the liver-pathy disease neuropathy: a disease affecting nerves-emia of the blood bacteremia: presence of bacteria in blood-itis inflammation colitis: inflammation of the colon-lysis destruction hemolysis: destruction of red blood cells-oma tumor lymphoma: cancer of the lymphatic system-osis diseased or abnormal condition leukocytosis: abnormally high number of white blood cells-derma of the skin keratoderma: a thickening of the skinTable 15.1Clinicians must rely on signs and on asking questions about symptoms, medical history, and the patient’s recentactivities to identify a particular disease and the potential causative agent. Diagnosis is complicated by the fact thatdifferent microorganisms can cause similar signs and symptoms in a patient. For example, an individual presentingwith symptoms of diarrhea may have been infected by one of a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms. Bacterialpathogens associated with diarrheal disease include Vibrio cholerae, Listeria monocytogenes, Campylobacter jejuni,and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC). Viral pathogens associated with diarrheal disease include norovirusand rotavirus. Parasitic pathogens associated with diarrhea include Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum.Likewise, fever is indicative of many types of infection, from the common cold to the deadly Ebola hemorrhagicfever.Finally, some diseases may be asymptomatic or subclinical, meaning they do not present any noticeable signs orsymptoms. For example, most individual infected with herpes simplex virus remain asymptomatic and are unawarethat they have been infected.• Explain the difference between signs and symptoms.1. F. Savino et al. “Pain Assessment in Children Undergoing Venipuncture: The Wong–Baker Faces Scale Versus Skin ConductanceFluctuations.” PeerJ 1 (2013):e37; https://peerj.com/articles/37/Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 663Classifications of DiseaseThe World Health Organization’s (WHO) International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is used in clinical fields toclassify diseases and monitor morbidity (the number of cases of a disease) and mortality (the number of deaths due toa disease). In this section, we will introduce terminology used by the ICD (and in health-care professions in general)to describe and categorize various types of disease.An infectious disease is any disease caused by the direct effect of a pathogen. A pathogen may be cellular (bacteria,parasites, and fungi) or acellular (viruses, viroids, and prions). Some infectious diseases are also communicable,meaning they are capable of being spread from person to person through either direct or indirect mechanisms. Someinfectious communicable diseases are also considered contagious diseases, meaning they are easily spread fromperson to person. Not all contagious diseases are equally so; the degree to which a disease is contagious usuallydepends on how the pathogen is transmitted. For example, measles is a highly contagious viral disease that can betransmitted when an infected person coughs or sneezes and an uninfected person breathes in droplets containingthe virus. Gonorrhea is not as contagious as measles because transmission of the pathogen (Neisseria gonorrhoeae)requires close intimate contact (usually sexual) between an infected person and an uninfected person.Diseases that are contracted as the result of a medical procedure are known as iatrogenic diseases. Iatrogenic diseasescan occur after procedures involving wound treatments, catheterization, or surgery if the wound or surgical sitebecomes contaminated. For example, an individual treated for a skin wound might acquire necrotizing fasciitis (anaggressive, “flesh-eating” disease) if bandages or other dressings became contaminated by Clostridium perfringensor one of several other bacteria that can cause this condition.Diseases acquired in hospital settings are known as nosocomial diseases. Several factors contribute to the prevalenceand severity of nosocomial diseases. First, sick patients bring numerous pathogens into hospitals, and some of thesepathogens can be transmitted easily via improperly sterilized medical equipment, bed sheets, call buttons, doorhandles, or by clinicians, nurses, or therapists who do not wash their hands before touching a patient. Second, manyhospital patients have weakened immune systems, making them more susceptible to infections. Compounding this,the prevalence of antibiotics in hospital settings can select for drug-resistant bacteria that can cause very seriousinfections that are difficult to treat.Certain infectious diseases are not transmitted between humans directly but can be transmitted from animals tohumans. Such a disease is called zoonotic disease (or zoonosis). According to WHO, a zoonosis is a disease thatoccurs when a pathogen is transferred from a vertebrate animal to a human; however, sometimes the term is definedmore broadly to include diseases transmitted by all animals (including invertebrates). For example, rabies is a viralzoonotic disease spread from animals to humans through bites and contact with infected saliva. Many other zoonoticdiseases rely on insects or other arthropods for transmission. Examples include yellow fever (transmitted through thebite of mosquitoes infected with yellow fever virus) and Rocky Mountain spotted fever (transmitted through the biteof ticks infected with Rickettsia rickettsii).In contrast to communicable infectious diseases, a noncommunicable infectious disease is not spread from oneperson to another. One example is tetanus, caused by Clostridium tetani, a bacterium that produces endospores thatcan survive in the soil for many years. This disease is typically only transmitted through contact with a skin wound; itcannot be passed from an infected person to another person. Similarly, Legionnaires disease is caused by Legionellapneumophila, a bacterium that lives within amoebae in moist locations like water-cooling towers. An individual maycontract Legionnaires disease via contact with the contaminated water, but once infected, the individual cannot passthe pathogen to other individuals.In addition to the wide variety of noncommunicable infectious diseases, noninfectious diseases (those not causedby pathogens) are an important cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Noninfectious diseases can be causedby a wide variety factors, including genetics, the environment, or immune system dysfunction, to name a few. Forexample, sickle cell anemia is an inherited disease caused by a genetic mutation that can be passed from parent tooffspring (Figure 15.2). Other types of noninfectious diseases are listed in Table 15.2.664 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Types of Noninfectious DiseasesType Definition ExampleInherited A genetic disease Sickle cell anemiaCongenital Disease that is present at or before birth Down syndromeDegenerative Progressive, irreversible loss of function Parkinson disease (affecting central nervoussystem)NutritionaldeficiencyImpaired body function due to lack ofnutrientsScurvy (vitamin C deficiency)Endocrine Disease involving malfunction of glandsthat release hormones to regulate bodyfunctionsHypothyroidism – thyroid does not produceenough thyroid hormone, which is important formetabolismNeoplastic Abnormal growth (benign or malignant) Some forms of cancerIdiopathic Disease for which the cause is unknown Idiopathic juxtafoveal retinal telangiectasia(dilated, twisted blood vessels in the retina of theeye)Table 15.2Figure 15.2 Blood smears showing two diseases of the blood. (a) Malaria is an infectious, zoonotic disease causedby the protozoan pathogen Plasmodium falciparum (shown here) and several other species of the genusPlasmodium. It is transmitted by mosquitoes to humans. (b) Sickle cell disease is a noninfectious genetic disorderthat results in abnormally shaped red blood cells, which can stick together and obstruct the flow of blood through thecirculatory system. It is not caused by a pathogen, but rather a genetic mutation. (credit a: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Ed Uthman)Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 665Lists of common infectious diseases can be found at the following Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (https://openstax.org/l/22CDCdis) (CDC),World Health Organization (https://openstax.org/l/22WHOdis) (WHO), andInternational Classification of Diseases (https://openstax.org/l/22WHOclass) websites.• Describe how a disease can be infectious but not contagious.• Explain the difference between iatrogenic disease and nosocomial disease.Periods of DiseaseThe five periods of disease (sometimes referred to as stages or phases) include the incubation, prodromal, illness,decline, and convalescence periods (Figure 15.3). The incubation period occurs in an acute disease after the initialentry of the pathogen into the host (patient). It is during this time the pathogen begins multiplying in the host.However, there are insufficient numbers of pathogen particles (cells or viruses) present to cause signs and symptomsof disease. Incubation periods can vary from a day or two in acute disease to months or years in chronic disease,depending upon the pathogen. Factors involved in determining the length of the incubation period are diverse, andcan include strength of the pathogen, strength of the host immune defenses, site of infection, type of infection, andthe size infectious dose received. During this incubation period, the patient is unaware that a disease is beginning todevelop.Link to Learning666 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 15.3 The progression of an infectious disease can be divided into five periods, which are related to thenumber of pathogen particles (red) and the severity of signs and symptoms (blue).The prodromal period occurs after the incubation period. During this phase, the pathogen continues to multiply andthe host begins to experience general signs and symptoms of illness, which typically result from activation of theimmune system, such as fever, pain, soreness, swelling, or inflammation. Usually, such signs and symptoms are toogeneral to indicate a particular disease. Following the prodromal period is the period of illness, during which thesigns and symptoms of disease are most obvious and severe.The period of illness is followed by the period of decline, during which the number of pathogen particles begins todecrease, and the signs and symptoms of illness begin to decline. However, during the decline period, patients maybecome susceptible to developing secondary infections because their immune systems have been weakened by theprimary infection. The final period is known as the period of convalescence. During this stage, the patient generallyreturns to normal functions, although some diseases may inflict permanent damage that the body cannot fully repair.Infectious diseases can be contagious during all five of the periods of disease. Which periods of disease are morelikely to associated with transmissibility of an infection depends upon the disease, the pathogen, and the mechanismsby which the disease develops and progresses. For example, with meningitis (infection of the lining of brain), theperiods of infectivity depend on the type of pathogen causing the infection. Patients with bacterial meningitis arecontagious during the incubation period for up to a week before the onset of the prodromal period, whereas patientswith viral meningitis become contagious when the first signs and symptoms of the prodromal period appear. Withmany viral diseases associated with rashes (e.g., chickenpox, measles, rubella, roseola), patients are contagious duringthe incubation period up to a week before the rash develops. In contrast, with many respiratory infections (e.g., colds,influenza, diphtheria, strep throat, and pertussis) the patient becomes contagious with the onset of the prodromalperiod. Depending upon the pathogen, the disease, and the individual infected, transmission can still occur during theperiods of decline, convalescence, and even long after signs and symptoms of the disease disappear. For example, anindividual recovering from a diarrheal disease may continue to carry and shed the pathogen in feces for some time,posing a risk of transmission to others through direct contact or indirect contact (e.g., through contaminated objectsor food).Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 667• Name some of the factors that can affect the length of the incubation period of a particular disease.Acute and Chronic DiseasesThe duration of the period of illness can vary greatly, depending on the pathogen, effectiveness of the immuneresponse in the host, and any medical treatment received. For an acute disease, pathologic changes occur over arelatively short time (e.g., hours, days, or a few weeks) and involve a rapid onset of disease conditions. For example,influenza (caused by Influenzavirus) is considered an acute disease because the incubation period is approximately1–2 days. Infected individuals can spread influenza to others for approximately 5 days after becoming ill. Afterapproximately 1 week, individuals enter the period of decline.For a chronic disease, pathologic changes can occur over longer time spans (e.g., months, years, or a lifetime). Forexample, chronic gastritis (inflammation of the lining of the stomach) is caused by the gram-negative bacteriumHelicobacter pylori. H. pylori is able to colonize the stomach and persist in its highly acidic environment byproducing the enzyme urease, which modifies the local acidity, allowing the bacteria to survive indefinitely.[2]Consequently, H. pylori infections can recur indefinitely unless the infection is cleared using antibiotics.[3] HepatitisB virus can cause a chronic infection in some patients who do not eliminate the virus after the acute illness. A chronicinfection with hepatitis B virus is characterized by the continued production of infectious virus for 6 months or longerafter the acute infection, as measured by the presence of viral antigen in blood samples.In latent diseases, as opposed to chronic infections, the causal pathogen goes dormant for extended periods oftime with no active replication. Examples of diseases that go into a latent state after the acute infection includeherpes (herpes simplex viruses [HSV-1 and HSV-2]), chickenpox (varicella-zoster virus [VZV]), and mononucleosis(Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]). HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV evade the host immune system by residing in a latent formwithin cells of the nervous system for long periods of time, but they can reactivate to become active infections duringtimes of stress and immunosuppression. For example, an initial infection by VZV may result in a case of childhoodchickenpox, followed by a long period of latency. The virus may reactivate decades later, causing episodes of shinglesin adulthood. EBV goes into latency in B cells of the immune system and possibly epithelial cells; it can reactivateyears later to produce B-cell lymphoma.• Explain the difference between latent disease and chronic disease.2. J.G. Kusters et al. Pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori Infection. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 19 no. 3 (2006):449–490.3. N.R. Salama et al. “Life in the Human Stomach: Persistence Strategies of the Bacterial Pathogen Helicobacter pylori.” Nature ReviewsMicrobiology 11 (2013):385–399.668 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.515.2 How Pathogens Cause DiseaseLearning Objectives• Summarize Koch’s postulates and molecular Koch’s postulates, respectively, and explain their significance andlimitations• Explain the concept of pathogenicity (virulence) in terms of infectious and lethal dose• Distinguish between primary and opportunistic pathogens and identify specific examples of each• Summarize the stages of pathogenesis• Explain the roles of portals of entry and exit in the transmission of disease and identify specific examples ofthese portalsFor most infectious diseases, the ability to accurately identify the causative pathogen is a critical step in finding orprescribing effective treatments. Today’s physicians, patients, and researchers owe a sizable debt to the physicianRobert Koch (1843–1910), who devised a systematic approach for confirming causative relationships betweendiseases and specific pathogens.Koch’s PostulatesIn 1884, Koch published four postulates (Table 15.3) that summarized his method for determining whether aparticular microorganism was the cause of a particular disease. Each of Koch’s postulates represents a criterion thatmust be met before a disease can be positively linked with a pathogen. In order to determine whether the criteria aremet, tests are performed on laboratory animals and cultures from healthy and diseased animals are compared (Figure15.4).Koch’s Postulates(1) The suspected pathogen must be found in every case of disease and not be found in healthy individuals.(2) The suspected pathogen can be isolated and grown in pure culture.(3) A healthy test subject infected with the suspected pathogen must develop the same signs and symptoms ofdisease as seen in postulate 1.(4) The pathogen must be re-isolated from the new host and must be identical to the pathogen from postulate 2.Table 15.3Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 669Figure 15.4 The steps for confirming that a pathogen is the cause of a particular disease using Koch’s postulates.In many ways, Koch’s postulates are still central to our current understanding of the causes of disease. However,advances in microbiology have revealed some important limitations in Koch’s criteria. Koch made severalassumptions that we now know are untrue in many cases. The first relates to postulate 1, which assumes thatpathogens are only found in diseased, not healthy, individuals. This is not true for many pathogens. For example, H.pylori, described earlier in this chapter as a pathogen causing chronic gastritis, is also part of the normal microbiota ofthe stomach in many healthy humans who never develop gastritis. It is estimated that upwards of 50% of the humanpopulation acquires H. pylori early in life, with most maintaining it as part of the normal microbiota for the rest oftheir life without ever developing disease.Koch’s second faulty assumption was that all healthy test subjects are equally susceptible to disease. We now knowthat individuals are not equally susceptible to disease. Individuals are unique in terms of their microbiota and thestate of their immune system at any given time. The makeup of the resident microbiota can influence an individual’ssusceptibility to an infection. Members of the normal microbiota play an important role in immunity by inhibiting thegrowth of transient pathogens. In some cases, the microbiota may prevent a pathogen from establishing an infection;in others, it may not prevent an infection altogether but may influence the severity or type of signs and symptoms.As a result, two individuals with the same disease may not always present with the same signs and symptoms. Inaddition, some individuals have stronger immune systems than others. Individuals with immune systems weakenedby age or an unrelated illness are much more susceptible to certain infections than individuals with strong immunesystems.Koch also assumed that all pathogens are microorganisms that can be grown in pure culture (postulate 2) and thatanimals could serve as reliable models for human disease. However, we now know that not all pathogens can begrown in pure culture, and many human diseases cannot be reliably replicated in animal hosts. Viruses and certain670 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5bacteria, including Rickettsia and Chlamydia, are obligate intracellular pathogens that can grow only when inside ahost cell. If a microbe cannot be cultured, a researcher cannot move past postulate 2. Likewise, without a suitablenonhuman host, a researcher cannot evaluate postulate 2 without deliberately infecting humans, which presentsobvious ethical concerns. AIDS is an example of such a disease because the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)only causes disease in humans.• Briefly summarize the limitations of Koch’s postulates.Molecular Koch’s PostulatesIn 1988, Stanley Falkow (1934–) proposed a revised form of Koch’s postulates known as molecular Koch’spostulates. These are listed in the left column of Table 15.4. The premise for molecular Koch’s postulates is not inthe ability to isolate a particular pathogen but rather to identify a gene that may cause the organism to be pathogenic.Falkow’s modifications to Koch’s original postulates explain not only infections caused by intracellular pathogens butalso the existence of pathogenic strains of organisms that are usually nonpathogenic. For example, the predominantform of the bacterium Escherichia coli is a member of the normal microbiota of the human intestine and is generallyconsidered harmless. However, there are pathogenic strains of E. coli such as enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) andenterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7) (EHEC). We now know ETEC and EHEC exist because of the acquisition ofnew genes by the once-harmless E. coli, which, in the form of these pathogenic strains, is now capable of producingtoxins and causing illness. The pathogenic forms resulted from minor genetic changes. The right-side column ofTable 15.4 illustrates how molecular Koch’s postulates can be applied to identify EHEC as a pathogenic bacterium.Molecular Koch’s Postulates Applied to EHECMolecular Koch’s Postulates Application to EHEC(1) The phenotype (sign or symptom ofdisease) should be associated only withpathogenic strains of a species.EHEC causes intestinal inflammation and diarrhea, whereasnonpathogenic strains of E. coli do not.(2) Inactivation of the suspected gene(s)associated with pathogenicity should resultin a measurable loss of pathogenicity.One of the genes in EHEC encodes for Shiga toxin, a bacterialtoxin (poison) that inhibits protein synthesis. Inactivating thisgene reduces the bacteria’s ability to cause disease.(3) Reversion of the inactive gene shouldrestore the disease phenotype.By adding the gene that encodes the toxin back into the genome(e.g., with a phage or plasmid), EHEC’s ability to cause diseaseis restored.Table 15.4As with Koch’s original postulates, the molecular Koch’s postulates have limitations. For example, geneticmanipulation of some pathogens is not possible using current methods of molecular genetics. In a similar vein, somediseases do not have suitable animal models, which limits the utility of both the original and molecular postulates.• Explain the differences between Koch’s original postulates and the molecular Koch’s postulates.Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 671Pathogenicity and VirulenceThe ability of a microbial agent to cause disease is called pathogenicity, and the degree to which an organism ispathogenic is called virulence. Virulence is a continuum. On one end of the spectrum are organisms that are avirulent(not harmful) and on the other are organisms that are highly virulent. Highly virulent pathogens will almost alwayslead to a disease state when introduced to the body, and some may even cause multi-organ and body system failure inhealthy individuals. Less virulent pathogens may cause an initial infection, but may not always cause severe illness.Pathogens with low virulence would more likely result in mild signs and symptoms of disease, such as low-gradefever, headache, or muscle aches. Some individuals might even be asymptomatic.An example of a highly virulent microorganism is Bacillus anthracis, the pathogen responsible for anthrax. B.anthracis can produce different forms of disease, depending on the route of transmission (e.g., cutaneous injection,inhalation, ingestion). The most serious form of anthrax is inhalation anthrax. After B. anthracis spores are inhaled,they germinate. An active infection develops and the bacteria release potent toxins that cause edema (fluid buildup intissues), hypoxia (a condition preventing oxygen from reaching tissues), and necrosis (cell death and inflammation).Signs and symptoms of inhalation anthrax include high fever, difficulty breathing, vomiting and coughing upblood, and severe chest pains suggestive of a heart attack. With inhalation anthrax, the toxins and bacteria enterthe bloodstream, which can lead to multi-organ failure and death of the patient. If a gene (or genes) involved inpathogenesis is inactivated, the bacteria become less virulent or nonpathogenic.Virulence of a pathogen can be quantified using controlled experiments with laboratory animals. Two importantindicators of virulence are the median infectious dose (ID50) and the median lethal dose (LD50), both of whichare typically determined experimentally using animal models. The ID50 is the number of pathogen cells or virionsrequired to cause active infection in 50% of inoculated animals. The LD50 is the number of pathogenic cells, virions,or amount of toxin required to kill 50% of infected animals. To calculate these values, each group of animals isinoculated with one of a range of known numbers of pathogen cells or virions. In graphs like the one shown inFigure 15.5, the percentage of animals that have been infected (for ID50) or killed (for LD50) is plotted againstthe concentration of pathogen inoculated. Figure 15.5 represents data graphed from a hypothetical experimentmeasuring the LD50 of a pathogen. Interpretation of the data from this graph indicates that the LD50 of the pathogenfor the test animals is 104 pathogen cells or virions (depending upon the pathogen studied).Figure 15.5 A graph like this is used to determine LD50 by plotting pathogen concentration against the percent ofinfected test animals that have died. In this example, the LD50 = 104 pathogenic particles.672 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Table 15.5 lists selected foodborne pathogens and their ID50 values in humans (as determined from epidemiologicdata and studies on human volunteers). Keep in mind that these are median values. The actual infective dose for anindividual can vary widely, depending on factors such as route of entry; the age, health, and immune status of thehost; and environmental and pathogen-specific factors such as susceptibility to the acidic pH of the stomach. It is alsoimportant to note that a pathogen’s infective dose does not necessarily correlate with disease severity. For example,just a single cell of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium can result in an active infection. The resultant disease,Salmonella gastroenteritis or salmonellosis, can cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, but has a mortality rate of lessthan 1% in healthy adults. In contrast, S. enterica serotype Typhi has a much higher ID50, typically requiring as manyas 1,000 cells to produce infection. However, this serotype causes typhoid fever, a much more systemic and severedisease that has a mortality rate as high as 10% in untreated individuals.ID50 for Selected Foodborne Diseases[4]Pathogen ID50VirusesHepatitis A virus 10–100Norovirus 1–10Rotavirus 10–100BacteriaEscherichia coli, enterohemorrhagic (EHEC, serotype O157) 10–100E. coli, enteroinvasive (EIEC) 200–5,000E. coli, enteropathogenic (EPEC) 10,000,000–10,000,000,000E. coli, enterotoxigenic (ETEC) 10,000,000–10,000,000,000Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi <1,000S. enterica serovar Typhimurium ≥1Shigella dysenteriae 10–200Vibrio cholerae (serotypes O139, O1) 1,000,000V. parahemolyticus 100,000,000ProtozoaGiardia lamblia 1Cryptosporidium parvum 10–100Table 15.5• What is the difference between a pathogen’s infective dose and lethal dose?• Which is more closely related to the severity of a disease?4. Food and Drug Administration. “Bad Bug Book, Foodborne Pathogenic Microorganisms and Natural Toxins.” 2nd ed. Silver Spring,MD: US Food and Drug Administration; 2012.Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 673Primary Pathogens versus Opportunistic PathogensPathogens can be classified as either primary pathogens or opportunistic pathogens. A primary pathogen can causedisease in a host regardless of the host’s resident microbiota or immune system. An opportunistic pathogen, bycontrast, can only cause disease in situations that compromise the host’s defenses, such as the body’s protectivebarriers, immune system, or normal microbiota. Individuals susceptible to opportunistic infections include the veryyoung, the elderly, women who are pregnant, patients undergoing chemotherapy, people with immunodeficiencies(such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]), patients who are recovering from surgery, and those whohave had a breach of protective barriers (such as a severe wound or burn).An example of a primary pathogen is enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which produces a virulence factor knownas Shiga toxin. This toxin inhibits protein synthesis, leading to severe and bloody diarrhea, inflammation, andrenal failure, even in patients with healthy immune systems. Staphylococcus epidermidis, on the other hand, is anopportunistic pathogen that is among the most frequent causes of nosocomial disease.[5] S. epidermidis is a member ofthe normal microbiota of the skin, where it is generally avirulent. However, in hospitals, it can also grow in biofilmsthat form on catheters, implants, or other devices that are inserted into the body during surgical procedures. Onceinside the body, S. epidermidis can cause serious infections such as endocarditis, and it produces virulence factors thatpromote the persistence of such infections.Other members of the normal microbiota can also cause opportunistic infections under certain conditions. This oftenoccurs when microbes that reside harmlessly in one body location end up in a different body system, where they causedisease. For example, E. coli normally found in the large intestine can cause a urinary tract infection if it enters thebladder. This is the leading cause of urinary tract infections among women.Members of the normal microbiota may also cause disease when a shift in the environment of the body leads toovergrowth of a particular microorganism. For example, the yeast Candida is part of the normal microbiota of theskin, mouth, intestine, and vagina, but its population is kept in check by other organisms of the microbiota. If anindividual is taking antibacterial medications, however, bacteria that would normally inhibit the growth of Candidacan be killed off, leading to a sudden growth in the population of Candida, which is not affected by antibacterialmedications because it is a fungus. An overgrowth of Candida can manifest as oral thrush (growth on mouth, throat,and tongue), a vaginal yeast infection, or cutaneous candidiasis. Other scenarios can also provide opportunities forCandida infections. Untreated diabetes can result in a high concentration of glucose in the saliva, which providesan optimal environment for the growth of Candida, resulting in thrush. Immunodeficiencies such as those seen inpatients with HIV, AIDS, and cancer also lead to higher incidence of thrush. Vaginal yeast infections can result fromdecreases in estrogen levels during the menstruation or menopause. The amount of glycogen available to lactobacilliin the vagina is controlled by levels of estrogen; when estrogen levels are low, lactobacilli produce less lactic acid.The resultant increase in vaginal pH allows overgrowth of Candida in the vagina.• Explain the difference between a primary pathogen and an opportunistic pathogen.• Describe some conditions under which an opportunistic infection can occur.Stages of PathogenesisTo cause disease, a pathogen must successfully achieve four steps or stages of pathogenesis: exposure (contact),adhesion (colonization), invasion, and infection. The pathogen must be able to gain entry to the host, travel to thelocation where it can establish an infection, evade or overcome the host’s immune response, and cause damage (i.e.,disease) to the host. In many cases, the cycle is completed when the pathogen exits the host and is transmitted to anew host.5. M. Otto. “Staphylococcus epidermidis--The ‘Accidental’ Pathogen.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 7 no. 8 (2009):555–567.674 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ExposureAn encounter with a potential pathogen is known as exposure or contact. The food we eat and the objects we handleare all ways that we can come into contact with potential pathogens. Yet, not all contacts result in infection anddisease. For a pathogen to cause disease, it needs to be able to gain access into host tissue. An anatomic site throughwhich pathogens can pass into host tissue is called a portal of entry. These are locations where the host cells are indirect contact with the external environment. Major portals of entry are identified in Figure 15.6 and include theskin, mucous membranes, and parenteral routes.Figure 15.6 Shown are different portals of entry where pathogens can gain access into the body. With the exceptionof the placenta, many of these locations are directly exposed to the external environment.Mucosal surfaces are the most important portals of entry for microbes; these include the mucous membranes of therespiratory tract, the gastrointestinal tract, and the genitourinary tract. Although most mucosal surfaces are in theinterior of the body, some are contiguous with the external skin at various body openings, including the eyes, nose,mouth, urethra, and anus.Most pathogens are suited to a particular portal of entry. A pathogen’s portal specificity is determined by theorganism’s environmental adaptions and by the enzymes and toxins they secrete. The respiratory and gastrointestinaltracts are particularly vulnerable portals of entry because particles that include microorganisms are constantly inhaledor ingested, respectively.Pathogens can also enter through a breach in the protective barriers of the skin and mucous membranes. Pathogensthat enter the body in this way are said to enter by the parenteral route. For example, the skin is a good natural barrierChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 675to pathogens, but breaks in the skin (e.g., wounds, insect bites, animal bites, needle pricks) can provide a parenteralportal of entry for microorganisms.In pregnant women, the placenta normally prevents microorganisms from passing from the mother to the fetus.However, a few pathogens are capable of crossing the blood-placental barrier. The gram-positive bacterium Listeriamonocytogenes, which causes the foodborne disease listeriosis, is one example that poses a serious risk to the fetusand can sometimes lead to spontaneous abortion. Other pathogens that can pass the placental barrier to infect the fetusare known collectively by the acronym TORCH (Table 15.6).Transmission of infectious diseases from mother to baby is also a concern at the time of birth when the baby passesthrough the birth canal. Babies whose mothers have active chlamydia or gonorrhea infections may be exposed tothe causative pathogens in the vagina, which can result in eye infections that lead to blindness. To prevent this, it isstandard practice to administer antibiotic drops to infants’ eyes shortly after birth.Pathogens Capable of Crossing the Placental Barrier (TORCH Infections)Disease PathogenT Toxoplasmosis Toxoplasma gondii (protozoan)O[6]SyphilisChickenpoxHepatitis BHIVFifth disease (erythema infectiosum)Treponema pallidum (bacterium)Varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus 3)Hepatitis B virus (hepadnavirus)RetrovirusParvovirus B19R Rubella (German measles) TogavirusC Cytomegalovirus Human herpesvirus 5H Herpes Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) 1 and 2Table 15.6Part 2At the clinic, a physician takes down Michael’s medical history and asks about his activities and diet over thepast week. Upon learning that Michael became sick the day after the party, the physician orders a blood test tocheck for pathogens associated with foodborne diseases. After tests confirm that presence of a gram-positiverod in Michael’s blood, he is given an injection of a broad-spectrum antibiotic and sent to a nearby hospital,where he is admitted as a patient. There he is to receive additional intravenous antibiotic therapy and fluids.• Is this bacterium in Michael’s blood part of normal microbiota?• What portal of entry did the bacteria use to cause this infection?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.AdhesionFollowing the initial exposure, the pathogen adheres at the portal of entry. The term adhesion refers to the capabilityof pathogenic microbes to attach to the cells of the body using adhesion factors, and different pathogens use variousmechanisms to adhere to the cells of host tissues.Molecules (either proteins or carbohydrates) called adhesins are found on the surface of certain pathogens and bind toClinical Focus6. The O in TORCH stands for “other.”676 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5specific receptors (glycoproteins) on host cells. Adhesins are present on the fimbriae and flagella of bacteria, the ciliaof protozoa, and the capsids or membranes of viruses. Protozoans can also use hooks and barbs for adhesion; spikeproteins on viruses also enhance viral adhesion. The production of glycocalyces (slime layers and capsules) (Figure15.7), with their high sugar and protein content, can also allow certain bacterial pathogens to attach to cells.Biofilm growth can also act as an adhesion factor. A biofilm is a community of bacteria that produce a glycocalyx,known as extrapolymeric substance (EPS), that allows the biofilm to attach to a surface. Persistent Pseudomonasaeruginosa infections are common in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis, burn wounds, and middle-ear infections(otitis media) because P. aeruginosa produces a biofilm. The EPS allows the bacteria to adhere to the host cells andmakes it harder for the host to physically remove the pathogen. The EPS not only allows for attachment but providesprotection against the immune system and antibiotic treatments, preventing antibiotics from reaching the bacterialcells within the biofilm. In addition, not all bacteria in a biofilm are rapidly growing; some are in stationary phase.Since antibiotics are most effective against rapidly growing bacteria, portions of bacteria in a biofilm are protectedagainst antibiotics.[7]Figure 15.7 Glycocalyx produced by bacteria in a biofilm allows the cells to adhere to host tissues and to medicaldevices such as the catheter surface shown here. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)InvasionOnce adhesion is successful, invasion can proceed. Invasion involves the dissemination of a pathogen throughoutlocal tissues or the body. Pathogens may produce exoenzymes or toxins, which serve as virulence factors that allowthem to colonize and damage host tissues as they spread deeper into the body. Pathogens may also produce virulencefactors that protect them against immune system defenses. A pathogen’s specific virulence factors determine thedegree of tissue damage that occurs. Figure 15.8 shows the invasion of H. pylori into the tissues of the stomach,causing damage as it progresses.7. D. Davies. “Understanding Biofilm Resistance to Antibacterial Agents.” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2 (2003):114–122.Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 677Figure 15.8 H. pylori is able to invade the lining of the stomach by producing virulence factors that enable it passthrough the mucin layer covering epithelial cells. (credit: modification of work by Zina Deretsky, National ScienceFoundation)Intracellular pathogens achieve invasion by entering the host’s cells and reproducing. Some are obligate intracellularpathogens (meaning they can only reproduce inside of host cells) and others are facultative intracellular pathogens(meaning they can reproduce either inside or outside of host cells). By entering the host cells, intracellular pathogensare able to evade some mechanisms of the immune system while also exploiting the nutrients in the host cell.Entry to a cell can occur by endocytosis. For most kinds of host cells, pathogens use one of two different mechanismsfor endocytosis and entry. One mechanism relies on effector proteins secreted by the pathogen; these effector proteinstrigger entry into the host cell. This is the method that Salmonella and Shigella use when invading intestinal epithelialcells. When these pathogens come in contact with epithelial cells in the intestine, they secrete effector moleculesthat cause protrusions of membrane ruffles that bring the bacterial cell in. This process is called membrane ruffling.The second mechanism relies on surface proteins expressed on the pathogen that bind to receptors on the host cell,resulting in entry. For example, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis produces a surface protein known as invasin that bindsto beta-1 integrins expressed on the surface of host cells.Some host cells, such as white blood cells and other phagocytes of the immune system, actively endocytose pathogensin a process called phagocytosis. Although phagocytosis allows the pathogen to gain entry to the host cell, inmost cases, the host cell kills and degrades the pathogen by using digestive enzymes. Normally, when a pathogenis ingested by a phagocyte, it is enclosed within a phagosome in the cytoplasm; the phagosome fuses with alysosome to form a phagolysosome, where digestive enzymes kill the pathogen (see Pathogen Recognition andPhagocytosis). However, some intracellular pathogens have the ability to survive and multiply within phagocytes.Examples include Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella; these bacteria produce proteins that lyse the phagosomebefore it fuses with the lysosome, allowing the bacteria to escape into the phagocyte’s cytoplasm where they canmultiply. Bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Legionella pneumophila, and Salmonella species use aslightly different mechanism to evade being digested by the phagocyte. These bacteria prevent the fusion of thephagosome with the lysosome, thus remaining alive and dividing within the phagosome.InfectionFollowing invasion, successful multiplication of the pathogen leads to infection. Infections can be described as local,focal, or systemic, depending on the extent of the infection. A local infection is confined to a small area of the body,typically near the portal of entry. For example, a hair follicle infected by Staphylococcus aureus infection may resultin a boil around the site of infection, but the bacterium is largely contained to this small location. Other examples oflocal infections that involve more extensive tissue involvement include urinary tract infections confined to the bladder678 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5or pneumonia confined to the lungs.In a focal infection, a localized pathogen, or the toxins it produces, can spread to a secondary location. For example,a dental hygienist nicking the gum with a sharp tool can lead to a local infection in the gum by Streptococcus bacteriaof the normal oral microbiota. These Streptococcus spp. may then gain access to the bloodstream and make their wayto other locations in the body, resulting in a secondary infection.When an infection becomes disseminated throughout the body, we call it a systemic infection. For example, infectionby the varicella-zoster virus typically gains entry through a mucous membrane of the upper respiratory system. It thenspreads throughout the body, resulting in the classic red skin lesions associated with chickenpox. Since these lesionsare not sites of initial infection, they are signs of a systemic infection.Sometimes a primary infection, the initial infection caused by one pathogen, can lead to a secondary infectionby another pathogen. For example, the immune system of a patient with a primary infection by HIV becomescompromised, making the patient more susceptible to secondary diseases like oral thrush and others caused byopportunistic pathogens. Similarly, a primary infection by Influenzavirus damages and decreases the defensemechanisms of the lungs, making patients more susceptible to a secondary pneumonia by a bacterial pathogen likeHaemophilus influenzae or Streptococcus pneumoniae. Some secondary infections can even develop as a result oftreatment for a primary infection. Antibiotic therapy targeting the primary pathogen can cause collateral damage tothe normal microbiota, creating an opening for opportunistic pathogens (see Case in Point: A Secondary YeastInfection).A Secondary Yeast InfectionAnita, a 36-year-old mother of three, goes to an urgent care center complaining of pelvic pressure, frequentand painful urination, abdominal cramps, and occasional blood-tinged urine. Suspecting a urinary tractinfection (UTI), the physician requests a urine sample and sends it to the lab for a urinalysis. Since it willtake approximately 24 hours to get the results of the culturing, the physician immediately starts Anita on theantibiotic ciprofloxacin. The next day, the microbiology lab confirms the presence of E. coli in Anita’s urine,which is consistent with the presumptive diagnosis. However, the antimicrobial susceptibility test indicates thatciprofloxacin would not effectively treat Anita’s UTI, so the physician prescribes a different antibiotic.After taking her antibiotics for 1 week, Anita returns to the clinic complaining that the prescription is not working.Although the painful urination has subsided, she is now experiencing vaginal itching, burning, and discharge.After a brief examination, the physician explains to Anita that the antibiotics were likely successful in killing theE. coli responsible for her UTI; however, in the process, they also wiped out many of the “good” bacteria inAnita’s normal microbiota. The new symptoms that Anita has reported are consistent with a secondary yeastinfection by Candida albicans, an opportunistic fungus that normally resides in the vagina but is inhibited bythe bacteria that normally reside in the same environment.To confirm this diagnosis, a microscope slide of a direct vaginal smear is prepared from the discharge tocheck for the presence of yeast. A sample of the discharge accompanies this slide to the microbiology lab todetermine if there has been an increase in the population of yeast causing vaginitis. After the microbiology labconfirms the diagnosis, the physician prescribes an antifungal drug for Anita to use to eliminate her secondaryyeast infection.• Why was Candida not killed by the antibiotics prescribed for the UTI?• List three conditions that could lead to a secondary infection.Case in PointChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 679Transmission of DiseaseFor a pathogen to persist, it must put itself in a position to be transmitted to a new host, leaving the infected hostthrough a portal of exit (Figure 15.9). As with portals of entry, many pathogens are adapted to use a particular portalof exit. Similar to portals of entry, the most common portals of exit include the skin and the respiratory, urogenital,and gastrointestinal tracts. Coughing and sneezing can expel pathogens from the respiratory tract. A single sneeze cansend thousands of virus particles into the air. Secretions and excretions can transport pathogens out of other portals ofexit. Feces, urine, semen, vaginal secretions, tears, sweat, and shed skin cells can all serve as vehicles for a pathogento leave the body. Pathogens that rely on insect vectors for transmission exit the body in the blood extracted by abiting insect. Similarly, some pathogens exit the body in blood extracted by needles.Figure 15.9 Pathogens leave the body of an infected host through various portals of exit to infect new hosts.680 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.515.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral PathogensLearning Objectives• Explain how virulence factors contribute to signs and symptoms of infectious disease• Differentiate between endotoxins and exotoxins• Describe and differentiate between various types of exotoxins• Describe the mechanisms viruses use for adhesion and antigenic variationIn the previous section, we explained that some pathogens are more virulent than others. This is due to the uniquevirulence factors produced by individual pathogens, which determine the extent and severity of disease they maycause. A pathogen’s virulence factors are encoded by genes that can be identified using molecular Koch’s postulates.When genes encoding virulence factors are inactivated, virulence in the pathogen is diminished. In this section,we examine various types and specific examples of virulence factors and how they contribute to each step ofpathogenesis.Virulence Factors for AdhesionAs discussed in the previous section, the first two steps in pathogenesis are exposure and adhesion. Recall that anadhesin is a protein or glycoprotein found on the surface of a pathogen that attaches to receptors on the host cell.Adhesins are found on bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoan pathogens. One example of a bacterial adhesin is type1 fimbrial adhesin, a molecule found on the tips of fimbriae of enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC). Recall that fimbriaeare hairlike protein bristles on the cell surface. Type 1 fimbrial adhesin allows the fimbriae of ETEC cells to attach tothe mannose glycans expressed on intestinal epithelial cells. Table 15.7 lists common adhesins found in some of thepathogens we have discussed or will be seeing later in this chapter.Some Bacterial Adhesins and Their Host Attachment SitesPathogen Disease Adhesin Attachment SiteStreptococcus pyogenes Strep throat Protein F Respiratory epithelialcellsStreptococcus mutans Dental caries Adhesin P1 TeethNeisseria gonorrhoeae Gonorrhea Type IV pili Urethral epithelial cellsEnterotoxigenic E. coli(ETEC)Traveler’sdiarrhea Type 1 fimbriae Intestinal epithelial cellsVibrio cholerae Cholera N-methylphenylalaninepili Intestinal epithelial cellsTable 15.7Part 3The presence of bacteria in Michael’s blood is a sign of infection, since blood is normally sterile. There is noindication that the bacteria entered the blood through an injury. Instead, it appears the portal of entry was thegastrointestinal route. Based on Michael’s symptoms, the results of his blood test, and the fact that Michaelwas the only one in the family to partake of the hot dogs, the physician suspects that Michael is suffering fromClinical FocusChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 681a case of listeriosis.Listeria monocytogenes, the facultative intracellular pathogen that causes listeriosis, is a common contaminantin ready-to-eat foods such as lunch meats and dairy products. Once ingested, these bacteria invade intestinalepithelial cells and translocate to the liver, where they grow inside hepatic cells. Listeriosis is fatal in about onein five normal healthy people, and mortality rates are slightly higher in patients with pre-existing conditions thatweaken the immune response. A cluster of virulence genes encoded on a pathogenicity island is responsiblefor the pathogenicity of L. monocytogenes. These genes are regulated by a transcriptional factor known aspeptide chain release factor 1 (PrfA). One of the genes regulated by PrfA is hyl, which encodes a toxin knownas listeriolysin O (LLO), which allows the bacterium to escape vacuoles upon entry into a host cell. A secondgene regulated by PrfA is actA, which encodes for a surface protein known as actin assembly-inducing protein(ActA). ActA is expressed on the surface of Listeria and polymerizes host actin. This enables the bacteriumto produce actin tails, move around the cell’s cytoplasm, and spread from cell to cell without exiting into theextracellular compartment.Michael’s condition has begun to worsen. He is now experiencing a stiff neck and hemiparesis (weakness ofone side of the body). Concerned that the infection is spreading, the physician decides to conduct additionaltests to determine what is causing these new symptoms.• What kind of pathogen causes listeriosis, and what virulence factors contribute to the signs andsymptoms Michael is experiencing?• Is it likely that the infection will spread from Michael’s blood? If so, how might this explain his newsymptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Bacterial Exoenzymes and Toxins as Virulence FactorsAfter exposure and adhesion, the next step in pathogenesis is invasion, which can involve enzymes and toxins. Manypathogens achieve invasion by entering the bloodstream, an effective means of dissemination because blood vesselspass close to every cell in the body. The downside of this mechanism of dispersal is that the blood also includesnumerous elements of the immune system. Various terms ending in –emia are used to describe the presence ofpathogens in the bloodstream. The presence of bacteria in blood is called bacteremia. Bacteremia involving pyogens(pus-forming bacteria) is called pyemia. When viruses are found in the blood, it is called viremia. The term toxemiadescribes the condition when toxins are found in the blood. If bacteria are both present and multiplying in the blood,this condition is called septicemia.Patients with septicemia are described as septic, which can lead to shock, a life-threatening decrease in blood pressure(systolic pressure <90 mm Hg) that prevents cells and organs from receiving enough oxygen and nutrients. Somebacteria can cause shock through the release of toxins (virulence factors that can cause tissue damage) and lead tolow blood pressure. Gram-negative bacteria are engulfed by immune system phagocytes, which then release tumornecrosis factor, a molecule involved in inflammation and fever. Tumor necrosis factor binds to blood capillaries toincrease their permeability, allowing fluids to pass out of blood vessels and into tissues, causing swelling, or edema(Figure 15.10). With high concentrations of tumor necrosis factor, the inflammatory reaction is severe and enoughfluid is lost from the circulatory system that blood pressure decreases to dangerously low levels. This can have direconsequences because the heart, lungs, and kidneys rely on normal blood pressure for proper function; thus, multiorganfailure, shock, and death can occur.682 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 15.10 This patient has edema in the tissue of the right hand. Such swelling can occur when bacteria causethe release of pro-inflammatory molecules from immune cells and these molecules cause an increased permeabilityof blood vessels, allowing fluid to escape the bloodstream and enter tissue.ExoenzymesSome pathogens produce extracellular enzymes, or exoenzymes, that enable them to invade host cells and deepertissues. Exoenzymes have a wide variety of targets. Some general classes of exoenzymes and associated pathogensare listed in Table 15.8. Each of these exoenzymes functions in the context of a particular tissue structure to facilitateinvasion or support its own growth and defend against the immune system. For example, hyaluronidase S, anenzyme produced by pathogens like Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Clostridium perfringens,degrades the glycoside hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid), which acts as an intercellular cement between adjacent cells inconnective tissue (Figure 15.11). This allows the pathogen to pass through the tissue layers at the portal of entryand disseminate elsewhere in the body (Figure 15.11).Some Classes of Exoenzymes and Their TargetsClass Example FunctionGlycohydrolases Hyaluronidase S inStaphylococcusaureusDegrades hyaluronic acid that cements cells together to promotespreading through tissuesNucleases DNAse producedby S. aureusDegrades DNA released by dying cells (bacteria and host cells) thatcan trap the bacteria, thus promoting spreadPhospholipases Phospholipase Cof BacillusanthracisDegrades phospholipid bilayer of host cells, causing cellular lysis,and degrade membrane of phagosomes to enable escape into thecytoplasmProteases Collagenase inClostridiumperfringensDegrades collagen in connective tissue to promote spreadTable 15.8Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 683Figure 15.11 (a) Hyaluronan is a polymer found in the layers of epidermis that connect adjacent cells. (b)Hyaluronidase produced by bacteria degrades this adhesive polymer in the extracellular matrix, allowing passagebetween cells that would otherwise be blocked.Pathogen-produced nucleases, such as DNAse produced by S. aureus, degrade extracellular DNA as a means ofescape and spreading through tissue. As bacterial and host cells die at the site of infection, they lyse and release theirintracellular contents. The DNA chromosome is the largest of the intracellular molecules, and masses of extracellularDNA can trap bacteria and prevent their spread. S. aureus produces a DNAse to degrade the mesh of extracellularDNA so it can escape and spread to adjacent tissues. This strategy is also used by S. aureus and other pathogens todegrade and escape webs of extracellular DNA produced by immune system phagocytes to trap the bacteria.Enzymes that degrade the phospholipids of cell membranes are called phospholipases. Their actions are specific inregard to the type of phospholipids they act upon and where they enzymatically cleave the molecules. The pathogenresponsible for anthrax, B. anthracis, produces phospholipase C. When B. anthracis is ingested by phagocytic cells ofthe immune system, phospholipase C degrades the membrane of the phagosome before it can fuse with the lysosome,allowing the pathogen to escape into the cytoplasm and multiply. Phospholipases can also target the membrane thatencloses the phagosome within phagocytic cells. As described earlier in this chapter, this is the mechanism usedby intracellular pathogens such as L. monocytogenes and Rickettsia to escape the phagosome and multiply withinthe cytoplasm of phagocytic cells. The role of phospholipases in bacterial virulence is not restricted to phagosomalescape. Many pathogens produce phospholipases that act to degrade cell membranes and cause lysis of target cells.These phospholipases are involved in lysis of red blood cells, white blood cells, and tissue cells.Bacterial pathogens also produce various protein-digesting enzymes, or proteases. Proteases can be classifiedaccording to their substrate target (e.g., serine proteases target proteins with the amino acid serine) or if they containmetals in their active site (e.g., zinc metalloproteases contain a zinc ion, which is necessary for enzymatic activity).One example of a protease that contains a metal ion is the exoenzyme collagenase. Collagenase digests collagen,the dominant protein in connective tissue. Collagen can be found in the extracellular matrix, especially near mucosalmembranes, blood vessels, nerves, and in the layers of the skin. Similar to hyaluronidase, collagenase allows thepathogen to penetrate and spread through the host tissue by digesting this connective tissue protein. The collagenaseproduced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium perfringens, for example, allows the bacterium to make itsway through the tissue layers and subsequently enter and multiply in the blood (septicemia). C. perfringens thenuses toxins and a phospholipase to cause cellular lysis and necrosis. Once the host cells have died, the bacteriumproduces gas by fermenting the muscle carbohydrates. The widespread necrosis of tissue and accompanying gas arecharacteristic of the condition known as gas gangrene (Figure 15.12).684 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 15.12 The illustration depicts a blood vessel with a single layer of endothelial cells surrounding the lumenand dense connective tissue (shown in red) surrounding the endothelial cell layer. Collagenase produced by C.perfringens degrades the collagen between the endothelial cells, allowing the bacteria to enter the bloodstream.(credit illustration: modification of work by Bruce Blaus; credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the Regents ofUniversity of Michigan Medical School © 2012)Two types of cell death are apoptosis and necrosis. Visit this website(https://openstax.org/l/22CellDeath) to learn more about the differencesbetween these mechanisms of cell death and their causes.ToxinsIn addition to exoenzymes, certain pathogens are able to produce toxins, biological poisons that assist in their abilityto invade and cause damage to tissues. The ability of a pathogen to produce toxins to cause damage to host cells iscalled toxigenicity.Toxins can be categorized as endotoxins or exotoxins. The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) found on the outer membraneof gram-negative bacteria is called endotoxin (Figure 15.13). During infection and disease, gram-negative bacterialpathogens release endotoxin either when the cell dies, resulting in the disintegration of the membrane, or when thebacterium undergoes binary fission. The lipid component of endotoxin, lipid A, is responsible for the toxic propertiesof the LPS molecule. Lipid A is relatively conserved across different genera of gram-negative bacteria; therefore,the toxic properties of lipid A are similar regardless of the gram-negative pathogen. In a manner similar to that oftumor necrosis factor, lipid A triggers the immune system’s inflammatory response (see Inflammation and Fever).If the concentration of endotoxin in the body is low, the inflammatory response may provide the host an effectivedefense against infection; on the other hand, high concentrations of endotoxin in the blood can cause an excessiveinflammatory response, leading to a severe drop in blood pressure, multi-organ failure, and death.Link to LearningChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 685Figure 15.13 Lipopolysaccharide is composed of lipid A, a core glycolipid, and an O-specific polysaccharide sidechain. Lipid A is the toxic component that promotes inflammation and fever.A classic method of detecting endotoxin is by using the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) test. In this procedure,the blood cells (amebocytes) of the horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus) is mixed with a patient’s serum. Theamebocytes will react to the presence of any endotoxin. This reaction can be observed either chromogenically (color)or by looking for coagulation (clotting reaction) to occur within the serum. An alternative method that has been usedis an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that uses antibodies to detect the presence of endotoxin.Unlike the toxic lipid A of endotoxin, exotoxins are protein molecules that are produced by a wide variety of livingpathogenic bacteria. Although some gram-negative pathogens produce exotoxins, the majority are produced by grampositivepathogens. Exotoxins differ from endotoxin in several other key characteristics, summarized in Table 15.9.In contrast to endotoxin, which stimulates a general systemic inflammatory response when released, exotoxins aremuch more specific in their action and the cells they interact with. Each exotoxin targets specific receptors on specificcells and damages those cells through unique molecular mechanisms. Endotoxin remains stable at high temperatures,and requires heating at 121 °C (250 °F) for 45 minutes to inactivate. By contrast, most exotoxins are heat labilebecause of their protein structure, and many are denatured (inactivated) at temperatures above 41 °C (106 °F).As discussed earlier, endotoxin can stimulate a lethal inflammatory response at very high concentrations and hasa measured LD50 of 0.24 mg/kg. By contrast, very small concentrations of exotoxins can be lethal. For example,botulinum toxin, which causes botulism, has an LD50 of 0.000001 mg/kg (240,000 times more lethal than endotoxin).Comparison of Endotoxin and Exotoxins Produced by BacteriaCharacteristic Endotoxin ExotoxinSource Gram-negative bacteria Gram-positive (primarily) and gram-negative bacteriaComposition Lipid A component oflipopolysaccharideProteinEffect on host General systemic symptomsof inflammation and feverSpecific damage to cells dependent upon receptor-mediatedtargeting of cells and specific mechanisms of actionHeat stability Heat stable Most are heat labile, but some are heat stableLD50 High LowTable 15.9The exotoxins can be grouped into three categories based on their target: intracellular targeting, membrane disrupting,and superantigens. Table 15.10 provides examples of well-characterized toxins within each of these three categories.686 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Some Common Exotoxins and Associated Bacterial PathogensCategory Example Pathogen Mechanism and DiseaseCholera toxin Vibrio cholerae Activation of adenylate cyclase in intestinal cells,causing increased levels of cyclic adenosinemonophosphate (cAMP) and secretion of fluids andelectrolytes out of cell, causing diarrheaTetanus toxin ClostridiumtetaniInhibits the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters inthe central nervous system, causing spastic paralysisBotulinumtoxinClostridiumbotulinumInhibits release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholinefrom neurons, resulting in flaccid paralysisIntracellulartargetingtoxinsDiphtheriatoxinCorynebacteriumdiphtheriaeInhibition of protein synthesis, causing cellular deathStreptolysin StreptococcuspyogenesPneumolysin StreptococcuspneumoniaeAlpha-toxin StaphylococcusaureusProteins that assemble into pores in cell membranes,disrupting their function and killing the cellAlpha-toxin ClostridiumperfringensPhospholipaseCPseudomonasaeruginosaMembranedisruptingtoxinsBeta-toxin StaphylococcusaureusPhospholipases that degrade cell membranephospholipids, disrupting membrane function andkilling the cellToxic shocksyndrometoxinStaphylococcusaureusStreptococcalmitogenicexotoxinStreptococcuspyogenesSuperantigensStreptococcalpyrogenictoxinsStreptococcuspyogenesStimulates excessive activation of immune systemcells and release of cytokines (chemical mediators)from immune system cells. Life-threatening fever,inflammation, and shock are the result.Table 15.10The intracellular targeting toxins comprise two components: A for activity and B for binding. Thus, these types oftoxins are known as A-B exotoxins (Figure 15.14). The B component is responsible for the cellular specificity ofthe toxin and mediates the initial attachment of the toxin to specific cell surface receptors. Once the A-B toxin bindsto the host cell, it is brought into the cell by endocytosis and entrapped in a vacuole. The A and B subunits separateas the vacuole acidifies. The A subunit then enters the cell cytoplasm and interferes with the specific internal cellularfunction that it targets.Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 687Figure 15.14 (a) In A-B toxins, the B component binds to the host cell through its interaction with specific cellsurface receptors. (b) The toxin is brought in through endocytosis. (c) Once inside the vacuole, the A component(active component) separates from the B component and the A component gains access to the cytoplasm. (credit:modification of work by “Biology Discussion Forum”/YouTube)Four unique examples of A-B toxins are the diphtheria, cholera, botulinum, and tetanus toxins. The diphtheria toxinis produced by the gram-positive bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the causative agent of nasopharyngealand cutaneous diphtheria. After the A subunit of the diphtheria toxin separates and gains access to the cytoplasm, itfacilitates the transfer of adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribose onto an elongation-factor protein (EF-2) that is neededfor protein synthesis. Hence, diphtheria toxin inhibits protein synthesis in the host cell, ultimately killing the cell(Figure 15.15).Figure 15.15 The mechanism of the diphtheria toxin inhibiting protein synthesis. The A subunit inactivateselongation factor 2 by transferring an ADP-ribose. This stops protein elongation, inhibiting protein synthesis andkilling the cell.Cholera toxin is an enterotoxin produced by the gram-negative bacterium Vibrio cholerae and is composed of oneA subunit and five B subunits. The mechanism of action of the cholera toxin is complex. The B subunits bind toreceptors on the intestinal epithelial cell of the small intestine. After gaining entry into the cytoplasm of the epithelialcell, the A subunit activates an intracellular G protein. The activated G protein, in turn, leads to the activation ofthe enzyme adenyl cyclase, which begins to produce an increase in the concentration of cyclic AMP (a secondarymessenger molecule). The increased cAMP disrupts the normal physiology of the intestinal epithelial cells and causes688 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5them to secrete excessive amounts of fluid and electrolytes into the lumen of the intestinal tract, resulting in severe“rice-water stool” diarrhea characteristic of cholera.Botulinum toxin (also known as botox) is a neurotoxin produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridiumbotulinum. It is the most acutely toxic substance known to date. The toxin is composed of a light A subunit andheavy protein chain B subunit. The B subunit binds to neurons to allow botulinum toxin to enter the neurons atthe neuromuscular junction. The A subunit acts as a protease, cleaving proteins involved in the neuron’s releaseof acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter molecule. Normally, neurons release acetylcholine to induce muscle fibercontractions. The toxin’s ability to block acetylcholine release results in the inhibition of muscle contractions,leading to muscle relaxation. This has the potential to stop breathing and cause death. Because of its action, lowconcentrations of botox are used for cosmetic and medical procedures, including the removal of wrinkles andtreatment of overactive bladder.Click this link (https://openstax.org/l/22pathochol) to see an animation of howthe cholera toxin functions.Click this link (https://openstax.org/l/22Botulin) to see an animation of howthe botulinum toxin functions.Another neurotoxin is tetanus toxin, which is produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium tetani. This toxinalso has a light A subunit and heavy protein chain B subunit. Unlike botulinum toxin, tetanus toxin binds to inhibitoryinterneurons, which are responsible for release of the inhibitory neurotransmitters glycine and gamma-aminobutyricacid (GABA). Normally, these neurotransmitters bind to neurons at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in theinhibition of acetylcholine release. Tetanus toxin inhibits the release of glycine and GABA from the interneuron,resulting in permanent muscle contraction. The first symptom is typically stiffness of the jaw (lockjaw). Violentmuscle spasms in other parts of the body follow, typically culminating with respiratory failure and death. Figure15.16 shows the actions of both botulinum and tetanus toxins.Link to LearningChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 689Figure 15.16 Mechanisms of botulinum and tetanus toxins. (credit micrographs: modification of work by Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)Membrane-disrupting toxins affect cell membrane function either by forming pores or by disrupting the phospholipidbilayer in host cell membranes. Two types of membrane-disrupting exotoxins are hemolysins and leukocidins, whichform pores in cell membranes, causing leakage of the cytoplasmic contents and cell lysis. These toxins were originallythought to target red blood cells (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leukocytes), respectively, but we now know theycan affect other cells as well. The gram-positive bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes produces streptolysins, watersolublehemolysins that bind to the cholesterol moieties in the host cell membrane to form a pore. The two types ofstreptolysins, O and S, are categorized by their ability to cause hemolysis in erythrocytes in the absence or presenceof oxygen. Streptolysin O is not active in the presence of oxygen, whereas streptolysin S is active in the presence ofoxygen. Other important pore-forming membrane-disrupting toxins include alpha toxin of Staphylococcus aureus andpneumolysin of Streptococcus pneumoniae.Bacterial phospholipases are membrane-disrupting toxins that degrade the phospholipid bilayer of cell membranesrather than forming pores. We have already discussed the phospholipases associated with B. anthracis, L.pneumophila, and Rickettsia species that enable these bacteria to effect the lysis of phagosomes. These samephospholipases are also hemolysins. Other phospholipases that function as hemolysins include the alpha toxin ofClostridium perfringens, phospholipase C of P. aeruginosa, and beta toxin of Staphylococcus aureus.Some strains of S. aureus also produce a leukocidin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL). PVL consists of twosubunits, S and F. The S component acts like the B subunit of an A-B exotoxin in that it binds to glycolipids on theouter plasma membrane of animal cells. The F-component acts like the A subunit of an A-B exotoxin and carries theenzymatic activity. The toxin inserts and assembles into a pore in the membrane. Genes that encode PVL are morefrequently present in S. aureus strains that cause skin infections and pneumonia.[8] PVL promotes skin infections by690 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5causing edema, erythema (reddening of the skin due to blood vessel dilation), and skin necrosis. PVL has also beenshown to cause necrotizing pneumonia. PVL promotes pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects on alveolar leukocytes.This results in the release of enzymes from the leukocytes, which, in turn, cause damage to lung tissue.The third class of exotoxins is the superantigens. These are exotoxins that trigger an excessive, nonspecificstimulation of immune cells to secrete cytokines (chemical messengers). The excessive production of cytokines,often called a cytokine storm, elicits a strong immune and inflammatory response that can cause life-threateninghigh fevers, low blood pressure, multi-organ failure, shock, and death. The prototype superantigen is the toxic shocksyndrome toxin of S. aureus. Most toxic shock syndrome cases are associated with vaginal colonization by toxinproducingS. aureus in menstruating women; however, colonization of other body sites can also occur. Some strainsof Streptococcus pyogenes also produce superantigens; they are referred to as the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxinsand the streptococcal pyrogenic toxins.• Describe how exoenzymes contribute to bacterial invasion.• Explain the difference between exotoxins and endotoxin.• Name the three classes of exotoxins.Virulence Factors for Survival in the Host and Immune EvasionEvading the immune system is also important to invasiveness. Bacteria use a variety of virulence factors to evadephagocytosis by cells of the immune system. For example, many bacteria produce capsules, which are used inadhesion but also aid in immune evasion by preventing ingestion by phagocytes. The composition of the capsuleprevents immune cells from being able to adhere and then phagocytose the cell. In addition, the capsule makes thebacterial cell much larger, making it harder for immune cells to engulf the pathogen (Figure 15.17). A notablecapsule-producing bacterium is the gram-positive pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae, which causes pneumococcalpneumonia, meningitis, septicemia, and other respiratory tract infections. Encapsulated strains of S. pneumoniae aremore virulent than nonencapsulated strains and are more likely to invade the bloodstream and cause septicemia andmeningitis.Some pathogens can also produce proteases to protect themselves against phagocytosis. As described in AdaptiveSpecific Host Defenses, the human immune system produces antibodies that bind to surface molecules found onspecific bacteria (e.g., capsules, fimbriae, flagella, LPS). This binding initiates phagocytosis and other mechanismsof antibacterial killing and clearance. Proteases combat antibody-mediated killing and clearance by attacking anddigesting the antibody molecules (Figure 15.17).In addition to capsules and proteases, some bacterial pathogens produce other virulence factors that allow them toevade the immune system. The fimbriae of certain species of Streptococcus contain M protein, which alters thesurface of Streptococcus and inhibits phagocytosis by blocking the binding of the complement molecules that assistphagocytes in ingesting bacterial pathogens. The acid-fast bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the causativeagent of tuberculosis) produces a waxy substance known as mycolic acid in its cell envelope. When it is engulfedby phagocytes in the lung, the protective mycolic acid coat enables the bacterium to resist some of the killingmechanisms within the phagolysosome.8. V. Meka. “Panton-Valentine Leukocidin.” http://www.antimicrobe.org/h04c.files/history/PVL-S-aureus.aspChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 691Figure 15.17 (a) A micrograph of capsules around bacterial cells. (b) Antibodies normally function by binding toantigens, molecules on the surface of pathogenic bacteria. Phagocytes then bind to the antibody, initiatingphagocytosis. (c) Some bacteria also produce proteases, virulence factors that break down host antibodies to evadephagocytosis. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Some bacteria produce virulence factors that promote infection by exploiting molecules naturally produced by thehost. For example, most strains of Staphylococcus aureus produce the exoenzyme coagulase, which exploits thenatural mechanism of blood clotting to evade the immune system. Normally, blood clotting is triggered in response toblood vessel damage; platelets begin to plug the clot, and a cascade of reactions occurs in which fibrinogen, a solubleprotein made by the liver, is cleaved into fibrin. Fibrin is an insoluble, thread-like protein that binds to blood platelets,cross-links, and contracts to form a mesh of clumped platelets and red blood cells. The resulting clot prevents furtherloss of blood from the damaged blood vessels. However, if bacteria release coagulase into the bloodstream, thefibrinogen-to-fibrin cascade is triggered in the absence of blood vessel damage. The resulting clot coats the bacteriain fibrin, protecting the bacteria from exposure to phagocytic immune cells circulating in the bloodstream.Whereas coagulase causes blood to clot, kinases have the opposite effect by triggering the conversion of plasminogento plasmin, which is involved in the digestion of fibrin clots. By digesting a clot, kinases allow pathogens trapped inthe clot to escape and spread, similar to the way that collagenase, hyaluronidase, and DNAse facilitate the spread ofinfection. Examples of kinases include staphylokinases and streptokinases, produced by Staphylococcus aureus andStreptococcus pyogenes, respectively. It is intriguing that S. aureus can produce both coagulase to promote clottingand staphylokinase to stimulate the digestion of clots. The action of the coagulase provides an important protectivebarrier from the immune system, but when nutrient supplies are diminished or other conditions signal a need for thepathogen to escape and spread, the production of staphylokinase can initiate this process.A final mechanism that pathogens can use to protect themselves against the immune system is called antigenicvariation, which is the alteration of surface proteins so that a pathogen is no longer recognized by the host’s immunesystem. For example, the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme disease, contains a surfacelipoprotein known as VlsE. Because of genetic recombination during DNA replication and repair, this bacterialprotein undergoes antigenic variation. Each time fever occurs, the VlsE protein in B. burgdorferi can differ somuch that antibodies against previous VlsE sequences are not effective. It is believed that this variation in the VlsEcontributes to the ability B. burgdorferi to cause chronic disease. Another important human bacterial pathogen thatuses antigenic variation to avoid the immune system is Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which causes the sexually transmitteddisease gonorrhea. This bacterium is well known for its ability to undergo antigenic variation of its type IV pili toavoid immune defenses.• Name at least two ways that a capsule provides protection from the immune system.• Besides capsules, name two other virulence factors used by bacteria to evade the immune system.692 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ResolutionBased on Michael’s reported symptoms of stiff neck and hemiparesis, the physician suspects that the infectionmay have spread to his nervous system. The physician decides to order a spinal tap to look for any bacteriathat may have invaded the meninges and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which would normally be sterile. Toperform the spinal tap, Michael’s lower back is swabbed with an iodine antiseptic and then covered with asterile sheet. The needle is aseptically removed from the manufacturer’s sealed plastic packaging by theclinician’s gloved hands. The needle is inserted and a small volume of fluid is drawn into an attached sampletube. The tube is removed, capped and a prepared label with Michael’s data is affixed to it. This STAT (urgentor immediate analysis required) specimen is divided into three separate sterile tubes, each with 1 mL of CSF.These tubes are immediately taken to the hospital’s lab, where they are analyzed in the clinical chemistry,hematology, and microbiology departments. The preliminary results from all three departments indicate there isa cerebrospinal infection occurring, with the microbiology department reporting the presence of a gram-positiverod in Michael’s CSF.These results confirm what his physician had suspected: Michael’s new symptoms are the result of meningitis,acute inflammation of the membranes that protect the brain and spinal cord. Because meningitis can be lifethreatening and because the first antibiotic therapy was not effective in preventing the spread of infection,Michael is prescribed an aggressive course of two antibiotics, ampicillin and gentamicin, to be deliveredintravenously. Michael remains in the hospital for several days for supportive care and for observation. After aweek, he is allowed to return home for bed rest and oral antibiotics. After 3 weeks of this treatment, he makesa full recovery.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Viral VirulenceAlthough viral pathogens are not similar to bacterial pathogens in terms of structure, some of the properties thatcontribute to their virulence are similar. Viruses use adhesins to facilitate adhesion to host cells, and certain envelopedviruses rely on antigenic variation to avoid the host immune defenses. These virulence factors are discussed in moredetail in the following sections.Viral AdhesinsOne of the first steps in any viral infection is adhesion of the virus to specific receptors on the surface of cells.This process is mediated by adhesins that are part of the viral capsid or membrane envelope. The interaction of viraladhesins with specific cell receptors defines the tropism (preferential targeting) of viruses for specific cells, tissues,and organs in the body. The spike protein hemagglutinin found on Influenzavirus is an example of a viral adhesin;it allows the virus to bind to the sialic acid on the membrane of host respiratory and intestinal cells. Another viraladhesin is the glycoprotein gp20, found on HIV. For HIV to infect cells of the immune system, it must interact withtwo receptors on the surface of cells. The first interaction involves binding between gp120 and the CD4 cellularmarker that is found on some essential immune system cells. However, before viral entry into the cell can occur,a second interaction between gp120 and one of two chemokine receptors (CCR5 and CXCR4) must occur. Table15.11 lists the adhesins for some common viral pathogens and the specific sites to which these adhesins allow virusesto attach.Clinical FocusChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 693Some Viral Adhesins and Their Host Attachment SitesPathogen Disease Adhesin Attachment SiteInfluenzavirus Influenza Hemagglutinin Sialic acid of respiratory and intestinal cellsHerpes simplex virusI or IIOral herpes,genital herpesGlycoproteinsgB, gC, gDHeparan sulfate on mucosal surfaces of themouth and genitalsHumanimmunodeficiencyvirusHIV/AIDS Glycoproteingp120CD4 and CCR5 or CXCR4 of immunesystem cellsTable 15.11Antigenic Variation in VirusesAntigenic variation also occurs in certain types of enveloped viruses, including influenza viruses, which exhibit twoforms of antigenic variation: antigenic drift and antigenic shift (Figure 15.18). Antigenic drift is the result of pointmutations causing slight changes in the spike proteins hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N). On the other hand,antigenic shift is a major change in spike proteins due to gene reassortment. This reassortment for antigenic shiftoccurs typically when two different influenza viruses infect the same host.The rate of antigenic variation in influenza viruses is very high, making it difficult for the immune system to recognizethe many different strains of Influenzavirus. Although the body may develop immunity to one strain through naturalexposure or vaccination, antigenic variation results in the continual emergence of new strains that the immune systemwill not recognize. This is the main reason that vaccines against Influenzavirus must be given annually. Each year’sinfluenza vaccine provides protection against the most prevalent strains for that year, but new or different strains maybe more prevalent the following year.694 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 15.18 Antigenic drift and antigenic shift in influenza viruses. (a) In antigenic drift, mutations in the genes forthe surface proteins neuraminidase and/or hemagglutinin result in small antigenic changes over time. (b) In antigenicshift, simultaneous infection of a cell with two different influenza viruses results in mixing of the genes. The resultantvirus possesses a mixture of the proteins of the original viruses. Influenza pandemics can often be traced to antigenicshifts.For another explanation of how antigenic shift and drift (https://openstax.org/l/22Antigenic) occur, watch this video.• Describe the role of adhesins in viral tropism.• Explain the difference between antigenic drift and antigenic shift.Link to LearningChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 69515.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic PathogensLearning Objectives• Describe virulence factors unique to fungi and parasites• Compare virulence factors of fungi and bacteria• Explain the difference between protozoan parasites and helminths• Describe how helminths evade the host immune systemAlthough fungi and parasites are important pathogens causing infectious diseases, their pathogenic mechanisms andvirulence factors are not as well characterized as those of bacteria. Despite the relative lack of detailed mechanisms,the stages of pathogenesis and general mechanisms of virulence involved in disease production by these pathogensare similar to those of bacteria.Fungal VirulencePathogenic fungi can produce virulence factors that are similar to the bacterial virulence factors that have beendiscussed earlier in this chapter. In this section, we will look at the virulence factors associated with species ofCandida, Cryptococcus, Claviceps, and Aspergillus.Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen and causative agent of oral thrush, vaginal yeast infections, andcutaneous candidiasis. Candida produces adhesins (surface glycoproteins) that bind to the phospholipids of epithelialand endothelial cells. To assist in spread and tissue invasion, Candida produces proteases and phospholipases (i.e.,exoenzymes). One of these proteases degrades keratin, a structural protein found on epithelial cells, enhancing theability of the fungus to invade host tissue. In animal studies, it has been shown that the addition of a protease inhibitorled to attenuation of Candida infection.[9] Similarly, the phospholipases can affect the integrity of host cell membranesto facilitate invasion.The main virulence factor for Cryptococcus, a fungus that causes pneumonia and meningitis, is capsule production.The polysaccharide glucuronoxylomannan is the principal constituent of the Cryptococcus capsule. Similar toencapsulated bacterial cells, encapsulated Cryptococcus cells are more resistant to phagocytosis than nonencapsulatedCryptococcus, which are effectively phagocytosed and, therefore, less virulent.Like some bacteria, many fungi produce exotoxins. Fungal toxins are called mycotoxins. Claviceps purpurea, afungus that grows on rye and related grains, produces a mycotoxin called ergot toxin, an alkaloid responsible for thedisease known as ergotism. There are two forms of ergotism: gangrenous and convulsive. In gangrenous ergotism,the ergot toxin causes vasoconstriction, resulting in improper blood flow to the extremities, eventually leading togangrene. A famous outbreak of gangrenous ergotism occurred in Eastern Europe during the 5th century AD due tothe consumption of rye contaminated with C. purpurea. In convulsive ergotism, the toxin targets the central nervoussystem, causing mania and hallucinations.The mycotoxin aflatoxin is a virulence factor produced by the fungus Aspergillus, an opportunistic pathogen that canenter the body via contaminated food or by inhalation. Inhalation of the fungus can lead to the chronic pulmonarydisease aspergillosis, characterized by fever, bloody sputum, and/or asthma. Aflatoxin acts in the host as both amutagen (a substance that causes mutations in DNA) and a carcinogen (a substance involved in causing cancer), andhas been associated with the development of liver cancer. Aflatoxin has also been shown to cross the blood-placentalbarrier.[10] A second mycotoxin produced by Aspergillus is gliotoxin. This toxin promotes virulence by inducing hostcells to self-destruct and by evading the host’s immune response by inhibiting the function of phagocytic cells as wellas the pro-inflammatory response. Like Candida, Aspergillus also produces several proteases. One is elastase, whichbreaks down the protein elastin found in the connective tissue of the lung, leading to the development of lung disease.9. K. Fallon et al. “Role of Aspartic Proteases in Disseminated Candida albicans Infection in Mice.” Infection and Immunity 65 no. 2(1997):551–556.10. C.P. Wild et al. “In-utero exposure to aflatoxin in west Africa.” Lancet 337 no. 8757 (1991):1602.696 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Another is catalase, an enzyme that protects the fungus from hydrogen peroxide produced by the immune system todestroy pathogens.• List virulence factors common to bacteria and fungi.• What functions do mycotoxins perform to help fungi survive in the host?Protozoan VirulenceProtozoan pathogens are unicellular eukaryotic parasites that have virulence factors and pathogenic mechanismsanalogous to prokaryotic and viral pathogens, including adhesins, toxins, antigenic variation, and the ability to surviveinside phagocytic vesicles.Protozoans often have unique features for attaching to host cells. The protozoan Giardia lamblia, which causes theintestinal disease giardiasis, uses a large adhesive disc composed of microtubules to attach to the intestinal mucosa.During adhesion, the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disc, resulting inan area of lower pressure that facilitates adhesion to epithelial cells. Giardia does not invade the intestinal cells butrather causes inflammation (possibly through the release of cytopathic substances that cause damage to the cells) andshortens the intestinal villi, inhibiting absorption of nutrients.Some protozoans are capable of antigenic variation. The obligate intracellular pathogen Plasmodium falciparum (oneof the causative agents of malaria) resides inside red blood cells, where it produces an adhesin membrane proteinknown as PfEMP1. This protein is expressed on the surface of the infected erythrocytes, causing blood cells to stickto each other and to the walls of blood vessels. This process impedes blood flow, sometimes leading to organ failure,anemia, jaundice (yellowing of skin and sclera of the eyes due to buildup of bilirubin from lysed red blood cells),and, subsequently, death. Although PfEMP1 can be recognized by the host’s immune system, antigenic variations inthe structure of the protein over time prevent it from being easily recognized and eliminated. This allows malaria topersist as a chronic infection in many individuals.The virulence factors of Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, include the abilitiesto form capsules and undergo antigenic variation. T. brucei evades phagocytosis by producing a dense glycoproteincoat that resembles a bacterial capsule. Over time, host antibodies are produced that recognize this coat, but T. bruceiis able to alter the structure of the glycoprotein to evade recognition.• Explain how antigenic variation by protozoan pathogens helps them survive in the host.Helminth VirulenceHelminths, or parasitic worms, are multicellular eukaryotic parasites that depend heavily on virulence factors thatallow them to gain entry to host tissues. For example, the aquatic larval form of Schistosoma mansoni, which causesschistosomiasis, penetrates intact skin with the aid of proteases that degrade skin proteins, including elastin.To survive within the host long enough to perpetuate their often-complex life cycles, helminths need to evade theimmune system. Some helminths are so large that the immune system is ineffective against them. Others, such asadult roundworms (which cause trichinosis, ascariasis, and other diseases), are protected by a tough outer cuticle.Over the course of their life cycles, the surface characteristics of the parasites vary, which may help prevent aneffective immune response. Some helminths express polysaccharides called glycans on their external surface; becauseChapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity 697these glycans resemble molecules produced by host cells, the immune system fails to recognize and attack thehelminth as a foreign body. This “glycan gimmickry,” as it has been called, serves as a protective cloak that allowsthe helminth to escape detection by the immune system.[11]In addition to evading host defenses, helminths can actively suppress the immune system. S. mansoni, for example,degrades host antibodies with proteases. Helminths produce many other substances that suppress elements of bothinnate nonspecific and adaptive specific host defenses. They also release large amounts of material into the host thatmay locally overwhelm the immune system or cause it to respond inappropriately.• Describe how helminths avoid being destroyed by the host immune system.Summary15.1 Characteristics of Infectious Disease• In an infection, a microorganism enters a host and begins to multiply. Some infections cause disease, whichis any deviation from the normal function or structure of the host.• Signs of a disease are objective and are measured. Symptoms of a disease are subjective and are reported bythe patient.• Diseases can either be noninfectious (due to genetics and environment) or infectious (due to pathogens).Some infectious diseases are communicable (transmissible between individuals) or contagious (easilytransmissible between individuals); others are noncommunicable, but may be contracted via contact withenvironmental reservoirs or animals (zoonoses)• Nosocomial diseases are contracted in hospital settings, whereas iatrogenic disease are the direct result of amedical procedure• An acute disease is short in duration, whereas a chronic disease lasts for months or years. Latent diseaseslast for years, but are distinguished from chronic diseases by the lack of active replication during extendeddormant periods.• The periods of disease include the incubation period, the prodromal period, the period of illness, theperiod of decline, and the period of convalescence. These periods are marked by changes in the number ofinfectious agents and the severity of signs and symptoms.15.2 How Pathogens Cause Disease• Koch’s postulates are used to determine whether a particular microorganism is a pathogen. MolecularKoch’s postulates are used to determine what genes contribute to a pathogen’s ability to cause disease.• Virulence, the degree to which a pathogen can cause disease, can be quantified by calculating either the ID50or LD50 of a pathogen on a given population.• Primary pathogens are capable of causing pathological changes associated with disease in a healthyindividual, whereas opportunistic pathogens can only cause disease when the individual is compromised bya break in protective barriers or immunosuppression.• Infections and disease can be caused by pathogens in the environment or microbes in an individual’s residentmicrobiota.• Infections can be classified as local, focal, or systemic depending on the extent to which the pathogen spreadsin the body.• A secondary infection can sometimes occur after the host’s defenses or normal microbiota are compromised11. I. van Die, R.D. Cummings. “Glycan Gimmickry by Parasitic Helminths: A Strategy for Modulating the Host Immune Response?”Glycobiology 20 no. 1 (2010):2–12.698 Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of PathogenicityThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5by a primary infection or antibiotic treatment.• Pathogens enter the body through portals of entry and leave through portals of exit. The stages ofpathogenesis include exposure, adhesion, invasion, infection, and transmission.15.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens• Virulence factors contribute to a pathogen’s ability to cause disease.• Exoenzymes and toxins allow pathogens to invade host tissue and cause tissue damage. Exoenzymes areclassified according to the macromolecule they target and exotoxins are classified based on their mechanismof action.• Bacterial toxins include endotoxin and exotoxins. Endotoxin is the lipid A component of the LPS of the gramnegativecell envelope. Exotoxins are proteins secreted mainly by gram-positive bacteria, but also are secretedby gram-negative bacteria.• Bacterial pathogens may evade the host immune response by producing capsules to avoid phagocytosis,surviving the intracellular environment of phagocytes, degrading antibodies, or through antigenic variation.• Viral pathogens use adhesins for initiating infections and antigenic variation to avoid immune defenses.• Influenza viruses use both antigenic drift and antigenic shift to avoid being recognized by the immunesystem.15.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens• Fungal and parasitic pathogens use pathogenic mechanisms and virulence factors that are similar to those ofbacterial pathogens• Fungi initiate infections through the interaction of adhesins with receptors on host cells. Some fungi producetoxins and exoenzymes involved in disease production and capsules that provide protection of phagocytosis.• Protozoa adhere to target cells through complex mechanisms and can cause cellular damage through releaseof cytopathic substances. Some protozoa avoid the immune system through antigenic variation and productionof capsules.• Helminthic worms are able to avoid the immune system by coating their exteriors with glycan molecules thatmake them look like host cells or by suppressing the immune system.