Chapter 6Acellular PathogensFigure 6.1 The year 2014 saw the first large-scale outbreak of Ebola virus (electron micrograph, left) in humanpopulations in West Africa (right). Such epidemics are now widely reported and documented, but viral epidemics aresure to have plagued human populations since the origin of our species. (credit left: modification of work by ThomasW. Geisbert)Chapter Outline6.1 Viruses6.2 The Viral Life Cycle6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and PrionsIntroductionPublic health measures in the developed world have dramatically reduced mortality from viral epidemics. But whenepidemics do occur, they can spread quickly with global air travel. In 2009, an outbreak of H1N1 influenza spreadacross various continents. In early 2014, cases of Ebola in Guinea led to a massive epidemic in western Africa. Thisincluded the case of an infected man who traveled to the United States, sparking fears the epidemic might spreadbeyond Africa.Until the late 1930s and the advent of the electron microscope, no one had seen a virus. Yet treatments for preventingor curing viral infections were used and developed long before that. Historical records suggest that by the 17thcentury, and perhaps earlier, inoculation (also known as variolation) was being used to prevent the viral diseasesmallpox in various parts of the world. By the late 18th century, Englishman Edward Jenner was inoculating patientswith cowpox to prevent smallpox, a technique he coined vaccination.[1]Today, the structure and genetics of viruses are well defined, yet new discoveries continue to reveal their complexities.In this chapter, we will learn about the structure, classification, and cultivation of viruses, and how they impact theirhosts. In addition, we will learn about other infective particles such as viroids and prions.1. S. Riedel “Edward Jenner and the History of Smallpox and Vaccination.” Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings 18, no. 1(January 2005): 21–25.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 2436.1 VirusesLearning Objectives• Describe the general characteristics of viruses as pathogens• Describe viral genomes• Describe the general characteristics of viral life cycles• Differentiate among bacteriophages, plant viruses, and animal viruses• Describe the characteristics used to identify viruses as obligate intracellular parasitesDespite their small size, which prevented them from being seen with light microscopes, the discovery of a filterablecomponent smaller than a bacterium that causes tobacco mosaic disease (TMD) dates back to 1892.[2] At that time,Dmitri Ivanovski, a Russian botanist, discovered the source of TMD by using a porcelain filtering device firstinvented by Charles Chamberland and Louis Pasteur in Paris in 1884. Porcelain Chamberland filters have a pore sizeof 0.1 μm, which is small enough to remove all bacteria ≥0.2 μm from any liquids passed through the device. Anextract obtained from TMD-infected tobacco plants was made to determine the cause of the disease. Initially, thesource of the disease was thought to be bacterial. It was surprising to everyone when Ivanovski, using a Chamberlandfilter, found that the cause of TMD was not removed after passing the extract through the porcelain filter. So if abacterium was not the cause of TMD, what could be causing the disease? Ivanovski concluded the cause of TMDmust be an extremely small bacterium or bacterial spore. Other scientists, including Martinus Beijerinck, continuedinvestigating the cause of TMD. It was Beijerinck, in 1899, who eventually concluded the causative agent was not abacterium but, instead, possibly a chemical, like a biological poison we would describe today as a toxin. As a result,the word virus, Latin for poison, was used to describe the cause of TMD a few years after Ivanovski’s initial discovery.Even though he was not able to see the virus that caused TMD, and did not realize the cause was not a bacterium,Ivanovski is credited as the original discoverer of viruses and a founder of the field of virology.Today, we can see viruses using electron microscopes (Figure 6.2) and we know much more about them. Viruses aredistinct biological entities; however, their evolutionary origin is still a matter of speculation. In terms of taxonomy,they are not included in the tree of life because they are acellular (not consisting of cells). In order to survive andreproduce, viruses must infect a cellular host, making them obligate intracellular parasites. The genome of a virusPart 1David, a 45-year-old journalist, has just returned to the U.S. from travels in Russia, China, and Africa. He isnot feeling well, so he goes to his general practitioner complaining of weakness in his arms and legs, fever,headache, noticeable agitation, and minor discomfort. He thinks it may be related to a dog bite he sufferedwhile interviewing a Chinese farmer. He is experiencing some prickling and itching sensations at the site of thebite wound, but he tells the doctor that the dog seemed healthy and that he had not been concerned until now.The doctor ordered a culture and sensitivity test to rule out bacterial infection of the wound, and the resultscame back negative for any possible pathogenic bacteria.• Based on this information, what additional tests should be performed on the patient?• What type of treatment should the doctor recommend?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus2. H. Lecoq. “[Discovery of the First Virus, the Tobacco Mosaic Virus: 1892 or 1898?].” Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Sciences –Serie III – Sciences de la Vie 324, no. 10 (2001): 929–933.244 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5enters a host cell and directs the production of the viral components, proteins and nucleic acids, needed to form newvirus particles called virions. New virions are made in the host cell by assembly of viral components. The new virionstransport the viral genome to another host cell to carry out another round of infection. Table 6.1 summarizes theproperties of viruses.Characteristics of VirusesInfectious, acellular pathogensObligate intracellular parasites with host and cell-type specificityDNA or RNA genome (never both)Genome is surrounded by a protein capsid and, in some cases, a phospholipid membrane studded with viralglycoproteinsLack genes for many products needed for successful reproduction, requiring exploitation of host-cell genomes toreproduceTable 6.1Figure 6.2 (a) Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) viewed with transmission electron microscope. (b) Plants infected withtobacco mosaic disease (TMD), caused by TMV. (credit a: modification of work by USDA Agricultural ResearchService—scale-bar data from Matt Russell; credit b: modification of work by USDA Forest Service, Department ofPlant Pathology Archive North Carolina State University)• Why was the first virus investigated mistaken for a toxin?Hosts and Viral TransmissionViruses can infect every type of host cell, including those of plants, animals, fungi, protists, bacteria, and archaea.Most viruses will only be able to infect the cells of one or a few species of organism. This is called the host range.However, having a wide host range is not common and viruses will typically only infect specific hosts and onlyspecific cell types within those hosts. The viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages, or simply phages.The word phage comes from the Greek word for devour. Other viruses are just identified by their host group, suchas animal or plant viruses. Once a cell is infected, the effects of the virus can vary depending on the type of virus.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 245Viruses may cause abnormal growth of the cell or cell death, alter the cell’s genome, or cause little noticeable effectin the cell.Viruses can be transmitted through direct contact, indirect contact with fomites, or through a vector: an animal thattransmits a pathogen from one host to another. Arthropods such as mosquitoes, ticks, and flies, are typical vectors forviral diseases, and they may act as mechanical vectors or biological vectors. Mechanical transmission occurs whenthe arthropod carries a viral pathogen on the outside of its body and transmits it to a new host by physical contact.Biological transmission occurs when the arthropod carries the viral pathogen inside its body and transmits it to thenew host through biting.In humans, a wide variety of viruses are capable of causing various infections and diseases. Some of the deadliestemerging pathogens in humans are viruses, yet we have few treatments or drugs to deal with viral infections, makingthem difficult to eradicate.Viruses that can be transmitted from an animal host to a human host can cause zoonoses. For example, the avianinfluenza virus originates in birds, but can cause disease in humans. Reverse zoonoses are caused by infection of ananimal by a virus that originated in a human.Fighting Bacteria with VirusesThe emergence of superbugs, or multidrug resistant bacteria, has become a major challenge forpharmaceutical companies and a serious health-care problem. According to a 2013 report by the US Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 2 million people are infected with drug-resistant bacteriain the US annually, resulting in at least 23,000 deaths.[3] The continued use and overuse of antibiotics will likelylead to the evolution of even more drug-resistant strains.One potential solution is the use of phage therapy, a procedure that uses bacteria-killing viruses(bacteriophages) to treat bacterial infections. Phage therapy is not a new idea. The discovery ofbacteriophages dates back to the early 20th century, and phage therapy was first used in Europe in 1915 by theEnglish bacteriologist Frederick Twort.[4] However, the subsequent discovery of penicillin and other antibioticsled to the near abandonment of this form of therapy, except in the former Soviet Union and a few countries inEastern Europe. Interest in phage therapy outside of the countries of the former Soviet Union is only recentlyre-emerging because of the rise in antibiotic-resistant bacteria.[5]Phage therapy has some advantages over antibiotics in that phages kill only one specific bacterium, whereasantibiotics kill not only the pathogen but also beneficial bacteria of the normal microbiota. Development of newantibiotics is also expensive for drug companies and for patients, especially for those who live in countries withhigh poverty rates.Phages have also been used to prevent food spoilage. In 2006, the US Food and Drug Administrationapproved the use of a solution containing six bacteriophages that can be sprayed on lunch meats such asbologna, ham, and turkey to kill Listeria monocytogenes, a bacterium responsible for listeriosis, a form offood poisoning. Some consumers have concerns about the use of phages on foods, however, especiallygiven the rising popularity of organic products. Foods that have been treated with phages must declare“bacteriophage preparation” in the list of ingredients or include a label declaring that the meat has been “treatedwith antimicrobial solution to reduce microorganisms.”[6]Micro Connections3. US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the UnitedStates, 2013.” http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf (accessed September 22, 2015).4. M. Clokie et al. “Phages in Nature.” Bacteriophage 1, no. 1 (2011): 31–45.5. A. Sulakvelidze et al. “Bacteriophage Therapy.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 45, no. 3 (2001): 649–659.6. US Food and Drug Administration. “FDA Approval of Listeria-specific Bacteriophage Preparation on Ready-to-Eat (RTE) Meat andPoultry Products.” http://www.fda.gov/food/ingredientspackaginglabeling/ucm083572.htm (accessed September 22, 2015).246 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Why do humans not have to be concerned about the presence of bacteriophages in their food?• What are three ways that viruses can be transmitted between hosts?Viral StructuresIn general, virions (viral particles) are small and cannot be observed using a regular light microscope. They are muchsmaller than prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; this is an adaptation allowing viruses to infect these larger cells (seeFigure 6.3). The size of a virion can range from 20 nm for small viruses up to 900 nm for typical, large viruses (seeFigure 6.4). Recent discoveries, however, have identified new giant viral species, such as Pandoravirus salinus andPithovirus sibericum, with sizes approaching that of a bacterial cell.[7]Figure 6.3 (a) In this transmission electron micrograph, a bacteriophage (a virus that infects bacteria) is dwarfed bythe bacterial cell it infects. (b) An illustration of the bacteriophage in the micrograph. (credit a: modification of work byU.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, LBL, PBD)7. N. Philippe et al. “Pandoraviruses: Amoeba Viruses with Genomes up to 2.5 Mb Reaching that of Parasitic Eukaryotes.” Science 341,no. 6143 (2013): 281–286.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 247Figure 6.4 The size of a virus is small relative to the size of most bacterial and eukaryotic cells and their organelles.In 1935, after the development of the electron microscope, Wendell Stanley was the first scientist to crystallize thestructure of the tobacco mosaic virus and discovered that it is composed of RNA and protein. In 1943, he isolatedInfluenza B virus, which contributed to the development of an influenza (flu) vaccine. Stanley’s discoveries unlockedthe mystery of the nature of viruses that had been puzzling scientists for over 40 years and his contributions to thefield of virology led to him being awarded the Nobel Prize in 1946.As a result of continuing research into the nature of viruses, we now know they consist of a nucleic acid (either RNAor DNA, but never both) surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid (see Figure 6.5). The interior of the capsid isnot filled with cytosol, as in a cell, but instead it contains the bare necessities in terms of genome and enzymes neededto direct the synthesis of new virions. Each capsid is composed of protein subunits called capsomeres made of one ormore different types of capsomere proteins that interlock to form the closely packed capsid.There are two categories of viruses based on general composition. Viruses formed from only a nucleic acid and capsidare called naked viruses or nonenveloped viruses. Viruses formed with a nucleic-acid packed capsid surrounded bya lipid layer are called enveloped viruses (see Figure 6.5). The viral envelope is a small portion of phospholipidmembrane obtained as the virion buds from a host cell. The viral envelope may either be intracellular or cytoplasmicin origin.Extending outward and away from the capsid on some naked viruses and enveloped viruses are protein structurescalled spikes. At the tips of these spikes are structures that allow the virus to attach and enter a cell, like the influenzavirus hemagglutinin spikes (H) or enzymes like the neuraminidase (N) influenza virus spikes that allow the virus todetach from the cell surface during release of new virions. Influenza viruses are often identified by their H and Nspikes. For example, H1N1 influenza viruses were responsible for the pandemics in 1918 and 2009,[8] H2N2 for thepandemic in 1957, and H3N2 for the pandemic in 1968.8. J. Cohen. “What’s Old Is New: 1918 Virus Matches 2009 H1N1 Strain. Science 327, no. 5973 (2010): 1563–1564.248 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 6.5 (a) The naked atadenovirus uses spikes made of glycoproteins from its capsid to bind to host cells. (b)The enveloped human immunodeficiency virus uses spikes made of glycoproteins embedded in its envelope to bindto host cells (credit a “micrograph”: modification of work by NIAID; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)Viruses vary in the shape of their capsids, which can be either helical, polyhedral, or complex. A helical capsidforms the shape of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), a naked helical virus, and Ebola virus, an enveloped helical virus.The capsid is cylindrical or rod shaped, with the genome fitting just inside the length of the capsid. Polyhedralcapsids form the shapes of poliovirus and rhinovirus, and consist of a nucleic acid surrounded by a polyhedral (manysided)capsid in the form of an icosahedron. An icosahedral capsid is a three-dimensional, 20-sided structure with12 vertices. These capsids somewhat resemble a soccer ball. Both helical and polyhedral viruses can have envelopes.Viral shapes seen in certain types of bacteriophages, such as T4 phage, and poxviruses, like vaccinia virus, may havefeatures of both polyhedral and helical viruses so they are described as a complex viral shape (see Figure 6.6). Inthe bacteriophage complex form, the genome is located within the polyhedral head and the sheath connects the headto the tail fibers and tail pins that help the virus attach to receptors on the host cell’s surface. Poxviruses that havecomplex shapes are often brick shaped, with intricate surface characteristics not seen in the other categories of capsid.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 249Figure 6.6 Viral capsids can be (a) helical, (b) polyhedral, or (c) have a complex shape. (credit a “micrograph”:modification of work by USDA ARS; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)• Which types of viruses have spikes?Classification and Taxonomy of VirusesAlthough viruses are not classified in the three domains of life, their numbers are great enough to requireclassification. Since 1971, the International Union of Microbiological Societies Virology Division has given the taskof developing, refining, and maintaining a universal virus taxonomy to the International Committee on Taxonomy ofViruses (ICTV). Since viruses can mutate so quickly, it can be difficult to classify them into a genus and a speciesepithet using the binomial nomenclature system. Thus, the ICTV’s viral nomenclature system classifies viruses intofamilies and genera based on viral genetics, chemistry, morphology, and mechanism of multiplication. To date, theICTV has classified known viruses in seven orders, 96 families, and 350 genera. Viral family names end in -viridae(e.g, Parvoviridae) and genus names end in −virus (e.g., Parvovirus). The names of viral orders, families, and generaare all italicized. When referring to a viral species, we often use a genus and species epithet such as Pandoravirusdulcis or Pandoravirus salinus.The Baltimore classification system is an alternative to ICTV nomenclature. The Baltimore system classifies viruses250 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5according to their genomes (DNA or RNA, single versus double stranded, and mode of replication). This system thuscreates seven groups of viruses that have common genetics and biology.Explore the latest virus taxonomy (https://www.openstax.org/l/22virustaxon)at the ICTV website.Aside from formal systems of nomenclature, viruses are often informally grouped into categories based on chemistry,morphology, or other characteristics they share in common. Categories may include naked or enveloped structure,single-stranded (ss) or double-stranded (ds) DNA or ss or ds RNA genomes, segmented or nonsegmented genomes,and positive-strand (+) or negative-strand (−) RNA. For example, herpes viruses can be classified as a dsDNAenveloped virus; human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a +ssRNA enveloped virus, and tobacco mosaic virus isa +ssRNA virus. Other characteristics such as host specificity, tissue specificity, capsid shape, and special genes orenzymes may also be used to describe groups of similar viruses. Table 6.2 lists some of the most common virusesthat are human pathogens by genome type.Common Pathogenic VirusesGenome Family Example Virus Clinical FeaturesPoxviridae Orthopoxvirus Skin papules, pustules, lesionsdsDNA, Poxviridae Parapoxvirus Skin lesionsenvelopedHerpesviridae Simplexvirus Cold sores, genital herpes, sexuallytransmitted diseaseAdenoviridae Atadenovirus Respiratory infection (common cold)Papillomaviridae Papillomavirus Genital warts, cervical, vulvar, or vaginaldsDNA, cancernakedReoviridae Reovirus Gastroenteritis severe diarrhea(stomach flu)Parvoviridae Adeno-associateddependoparvovirus A Respiratory tract infectionssDNA,nakedParvoviridae Adeno-associateddependoparvovirus B Respiratory tract infectiondsRNA,naked Reoviridae Rotavirus GastroenteritisPicornaviridae Enterovirus C PoliomyelitisPicornaviridae Rhinovirus Upper respiratory tract infection(common cold)+ssRNA,nakedPicornaviridae Hepatovirus Hepatitis+ssRNA,enveloped Togaviridae Alphavirus Encephalitis, hemorrhagic feverTable 6.2Link to LearningChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 251Common Pathogenic VirusesGenome Family Example Virus Clinical FeaturesTogaviridae Rubivirus RubellaRetroviridae Lentivirus Acquired immune deficiency syndrome(AIDS)Filoviridae Zaire Ebolavirus Hemorrhagic fever−ssRNA, Orthomyxoviridae Influenzavirus A, B, C FluenvelopedRhabdoviridae Lyssavirus RabiesTable 6.2• What are the types of virus genomes?Classification of Viral DiseasesWhile the ICTV has been tasked with the biological classification of viruses, it has also played an important role inthe classification of diseases caused by viruses. To facilitate the tracking of virus-related human diseases, the ICTVhas created classifications that link to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), the standard taxonomy ofdisease that is maintained and updated by the World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD assigns an alphanumericcode of up to six characters to every type of viral infection, as well as all other types of diseases, medical conditions,and causes of death. This ICD code is used in conjunction with two other coding systems (the Current ProceduralTerminology, and the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System) to categorize patient conditions for treatmentand insurance reimbursement.For example, when a patient seeks treatment for a viral infection, ICD codes are routinely used by clinicians toorder laboratory tests and prescribe treatments specific to the virus suspected of causing the illness. This ICD codeis then used by medical laboratories to identify tests that must be performed to confirm the diagnosis. The ICDcode is used by the health-care management system to verify that all treatments and laboratory work performed areappropriate for the given virus. Medical coders use ICD codes to assign the proper code for procedures performed,and medical billers, in turn, use this information to process claims for reimbursement by insurance companies. Vitalrecordskeepers use ICD codes to record cause of death on death certificates, and epidemiologists used ICD codes tocalculate morbidity and mortality statistics.• Identify two locations where you would likely find an ICD code.252 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Part 2David’s doctor was concerned that his symptoms included prickling and itching at the site of the dog bite;these sensations could be early symptoms of rabies. Several tests are available to diagnose rabies in livepatients, but no single antemortem test is adequate. The doctor decided to take samples of David’s blood,saliva, and skin for testing. The skin sample was taken from the nape of the neck (posterior side of the necknear the hairline). It was about 6-mm long and contained at least 10 hair follicles, including the superficialcutaneous nerve. An immunofluorescent staining technique was used on the skin biopsy specimen to detectrabies antibodies in the cutaneous nerves at the base of the hair follicles. A test was also performed on aserum sample from David’s blood to determine whether any antibodies for the rabies virus had been produced.Meanwhile, the saliva sample was used for reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)analysis, a test that can detect the presence of viral nucleic acid (RNA). The blood tests came back positivefor the presence of rabies virus antigen, prompting David’s doctor to prescribe prophylactic treatment. Davidis given a series of intramuscular injections of human rabies immunoglobulin along with a series of rabiesvaccines.• Why does the immunofluorescent technique look for rabies antibodies rather than the rabies virusitself?• If David has contracted rabies, what is his prognosis?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.6.2 The Viral Life CycleLearning Objectives• Describe the lytic and lysogenic life cycles• Describe the replication process of animal viruses• Describe unique characteristics of retroviruses and latent viruses• Discuss human viruses and their virus-host cell interactions• Explain the process of transduction• Describe the replication process of plant virusesAll viruses depend on cells for reproduction and metabolic processes. By themselves, viruses do not encode for allof the enzymes necessary for viral replication. But within a host cell, a virus can commandeer cellular machineryto produce more viral particles. Bacteriophages replicate only in the cytoplasm, since prokaryotic cells do not havea nucleus or organelles. In eukaryotic cells, most DNA viruses can replicate inside the nucleus, with an exceptionobserved in the large DNA viruses, such as the poxviruses, that can replicate in the cytoplasm. RNA viruses thatinfect animal cells often replicate in the cytoplasm.The Life Cycle of Viruses with Prokaryote HostsThe life cycle of bacteriophages has been a good model for understanding how viruses affect the cells they infect,since similar processes have been observed for eukaryotic viruses, which can cause immediate death of the cell orestablish a latent or chronic infection. Virulent phages typically lead to the death of the cell through cell lysis.Temperate phages, on the other hand, can become part of a host chromosome and are replicated with the cell genomeuntil such time as they are induced to make newly assembled viruses, or progeny viruses.Clinical FocusChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 253The Lytic CycleDuring the lytic cycle of virulent phage, the bacteriophage takes over the cell, reproduces new phages, and destroysthe cell. T-even phage is a good example of a well-characterized class of virulent phages. There are five stages in thebacteriophage lytic cycle (see Figure 6.7). Attachment is the first stage in the infection process in which the phageinteracts with specific bacterial surface receptors (e.g., lipopolysaccharides and OmpC protein on host surfaces). Mostphages have a narrow host range and may infect one species of bacteria or one strain within a species. This uniquerecognition can be exploited for targeted treatment of bacterial infection by phage therapy or for phage typing toidentify unique bacterial subspecies or strains. The second stage of infection is entry or penetration. This occursthrough contraction of the tail sheath, which acts like a hypodermic needle to inject the viral genome through the cellwall and membrane. The phage head and remaining components remain outside the bacteria.Figure 6.7 A virulent phage shows only the lytic cycle pictured here. In the lytic cycle, the phage replicates and lysesthe host cell.The third stage of infection is biosynthesis of new viral components. After entering the host cell, the virus synthesizesvirus-encoded endonucleases to degrade the bacterial chromosome. It then hijacks the host cell to replicate, transcribe,and translate the necessary viral components (capsomeres, sheath, base plates, tail fibers, and viral enzymes) for theassembly of new viruses. Polymerase genes are usually expressed early in the cycle, while capsid and tail proteins areexpressed later. During the maturation phase, new virions are created. To liberate free phages, the bacterial cell wallis disrupted by phage proteins such as holin or lysozyme. The final stage is release. Mature viruses burst out of thehost cell in a process called lysis and the progeny viruses are liberated into the environment to infect new cells.The Lysogenic CycleIn a lysogenic cycle, the phage genome also enters the cell through attachment and penetration. A prime example ofa phage with this type of life cycle is the lambda phage. During the lysogenic cycle, instead of killing the host, thephage genome integrates into the bacterial chromosome and becomes part of the host. The integrated phage genome iscalled a prophage. A bacterial host with a prophage is called a lysogen. The process in which a bacterium is infectedby a temperate phage is called lysogeny. It is typical of temperate phages to be latent or inactive within the cell. Asthe bacterium replicates its chromosome, it also replicates the phage’s DNA and passes it on to new daughter cellsduring reproduction. The presence of the phage may alter the phenotype of the bacterium, since it can bring in extragenes (e.g., toxin genes that can increase bacterial virulence). This change in the host phenotype is called lysogenicconversion or phage conversion. Some bacteria, such as Vibrio cholerae and Clostridium botulinum, are less virulentin the absence of the prophage. The phages infecting these bacteria carry the toxin genes in their genome and enhancethe virulence of the host when the toxin genes are expressed. In the case of V. cholera, phage encoded toxin can causesevere diarrhea; in C. botulinum, the toxin can cause paralysis. During lysogeny, the prophage will persist in the hostchromosome until induction, which results in the excision of the viral genome from the host chromosome. After254 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5induction has occurred the temperate phage can proceed through a lytic cycle and then undergo lysogeny in a newlyinfected cell (see Figure 6.8).Figure 6.8 A temperate bacteriophage has both lytic and lysogenic cycles. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA isincorporated into the host genome, forming a prophage, which is passed on to subsequent generations of cells.Environmental stressors such as starvation or exposure to toxic chemicals may cause the prophage to be excisedand enter the lytic cycle.This video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22lysogeniclife) illustrates the stagesof the lysogenic life cycle of a bacteriophage and the transition to a lytic phase.• Is a latent phage undetectable in a bacterium?TransductionTransduction occurs when a bacteriophage transfers bacterial DNA from one bacterium to another during sequentialinfections. There are two types of transduction: generalized and specialized transduction. During the lytic cycle ofviral replication, the virus hijacks the host cell, degrades the host chromosome, and makes more viral genomes. Asit assembles and packages DNA into the phage head, packaging occasionally makes a mistake. Instead of packagingviral DNA, it takes a random piece of host DNA and inserts it into the capsid. Once released, this virion will thenLink to LearningChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 255inject the former host’s DNA into a newly infected host. The asexual transfer of genetic information can allow forDNA recombination to occur, thus providing the new host with new genes (e.g., an antibiotic-resistance gene, or asugar-metabolizing gene). Generalized transduction occurs when a random piece of bacterial chromosomal DNAis transferred by the phage during the lytic cycle. Specialized transduction occurs at the end of the lysogenic cycle,when the prophage is excised and the bacteriophage enters the lytic cycle. Since the phage is integrated into the hostgenome, the prophage can replicate as part of the host. However, some conditions (e.g., ultraviolet light exposureor chemical exposure) stimulate the prophage to undergo induction, causing the phage to excise from the genome,enter the lytic cycle, and produce new phages to leave host cells. During the process of excision from the hostchromosome, a phage may occasionally remove some bacterial DNA near the site of viral integration. The phage andhost DNA from one end or both ends of the integration site are packaged within the capsid and are transferred to thenew, infected host. Since the DNA transferred by the phage is not randomly packaged but is instead a specific pieceof DNA near the site of integration, this mechanism of gene transfer is referred to as specialized transduction (seeFigure 6.9). The DNA can then recombine with host chromosome, giving the latter new characteristics. Transductionseems to play an important role in the evolutionary process of bacteria, giving them a mechanism for asexualexchange of genetic information.Figure 6.9 This flowchart illustrates the mechanism of specialized transduction. An integrated phage excises,bringing with it a piece of the DNA adjacent to its insertion point. On reinfection of a new bacterium, the phage DNAintegrates along with the genetic material acquired from the previous host.• Which phage life cycle is associated with which forms of transduction?Life Cycle of Viruses with Animal HostsLytic animal viruses follow similar infection stages to bacteriophages: attachment, penetration, biosynthesis,maturation, and release (see Figure 6.10). However, the mechanisms of penetration, nucleic-acid biosynthesis, andrelease differ between bacterial and animal viruses. After binding to host receptors, animal viruses enter throughendocytosis (engulfment by the host cell) or through membrane fusion (viral envelope with the host cell membrane).Many viruses are host specific, meaning they only infect a certain type of host; and most viruses only infect certaintypes of cells within tissues. This specificity is called a tissue tropism. Examples of this are demonstrated by thepoliovirus, which exhibits tropism for the tissues of the brain and spinal cord, or the influenza virus, which has aprimary tropism for the respiratory tract.256 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 6.10 In influenza virus infection, viral glycoproteins attach the virus to a host epithelial cell. As a result, thevirus is engulfed. Viral RNA and viral proteins are made and assembled into new virions that are released bybudding.Animal viruses do not always express their genes using the normal flow of genetic information—from DNA to RNAto protein. Some viruses have a dsDNA genome like cellular organisms and can follow the normal flow. However,others may have ssDNA, dsRNA, or ssRNA genomes. The nature of the genome determines how the genome isreplicated and expressed as viral proteins. If a genome is ssDNA, host enzymes will be used to synthesize a secondstrand that is complementary to the genome strand, thus producing dsDNA. The dsDNA can now be replicated,transcribed, and translated similar to host DNA.If the viral genome is RNA, a different mechanism must be used. There are three types of RNA genome: dsRNA,positive (+) single-strand (+ssRNA) or negative (−) single-strand RNA (−ssRNA). If a virus has a +ssRNAgenome, it can be translated directly to make viral proteins. Viral genomic +ssRNA acts like cellular mRNA.However, if a virus contains a −ssRNA genome, the host ribosomes cannot translate it until the −ssRNA is replicatedinto +ssRNA by viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) (see Figure 6.11). The RdRP is brought in by thevirus and can be used to make +ssRNA from the original −ssRNA genome. The RdRP is also an important enzymefor the replication of dsRNA viruses, because it uses the negative strand of the double-stranded genome as a templateto create +ssRNA. The newly synthesized +ssRNA copies can then be translated by cellular ribosomes.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 257Figure 6.11 RNA viruses can contain +ssRNA that can be directly read by the ribosomes to synthesize viralproteins. Viruses containing −ssRNA must first use the −ssRNA as a template for the synthesis of +ssRNA beforeviral proteins can be synthesized.An alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis is observed in the retroviruses, which are +ssRNA viruses(see Figure 6.12). Single-stranded RNA viruses such as HIV carry a special enzyme called reverse transcriptasewithin the capsid that synthesizes a complementary ssDNA (cDNA) copy using the +ssRNA genome as a template.The ssDNA is then made into dsDNA, which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent partof the host. The integrated viral genome is called a provirus. The virus now can remain in the host for a long timeto establish a chronic infection. The provirus stage is similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during thelysogenic cycle. However, unlike prophage, the provirus does not undergo excision after splicing into the genome.258 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 6.12 HIV, an enveloped, icosahedral retrovirus, attaches to a cell surface receptor of an immune cell andfuses with the cell membrane. Viral contents are released into the cell, where viral enzymes convert the singlestrandedRNA genome into DNA and incorporate it into the host genome. (credit: modification of work by NIAID, NIH)Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 259• Is RNA-dependent RNA polymerase made from a viral gene or a host gene?Persistent InfectionsPersistent infection occurs when a virus is not completely cleared from the system of the host but stays in certaintissues or organs of the infected person. The virus may remain silent or undergo productive infection without seriouslyharming or killing the host. Mechanisms of persistent infection may involve the regulation of the viral or host geneexpressions or the alteration of the host immune response. The two primary categories of persistent infections arelatent infection and chronic infection. Examples of viruses that cause latent infections include herpes simplex virus(oral and genital herpes), varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox and shingles), and Epstein-Barr virus (mononucleosis).Hepatitis C virus and HIV are two examples of viruses that cause long-term chronic infections.Latent InfectionNot all animal viruses undergo replication by the lytic cycle. There are viruses that are capable of remaining hiddenor dormant inside the cell in a process called latency. These types of viruses are known as latent viruses and maycause latent infections. Viruses capable of latency may initially cause an acute infection before becoming dormant.For example, the varicella-zoster virus infects many cells throughout the body and causes chickenpox, characterizedby a rash of blisters covering the skin. About 10 to 12 days postinfection, the disease resolves and the virus goesdormant, living within nerve-cell ganglia for years. During this time, the virus does not kill the nerve cells or continuereplicating. It is not clear why the virus stops replicating within the nerve cells and expresses few viral proteins but, insome cases, typically after many years of dormancy, the virus is reactivated and causes a new disease called shingles(Figure 6.13). Whereas chickenpox affects many areas throughout the body, shingles is a nerve cell-specific diseaseemerging from the ganglia in which the virus was dormant.Figure 6.13 (a) Varicella-zoster, the virus that causes chickenpox, has an enveloped icosahedral capsid visible inthis transmission electron micrograph. Its double-stranded DNA genome becomes incorporated in the host DNA. (b)After a period of latency, the virus can reactivate in the form of shingles, usually manifesting as a painful, localizedrash on one side of the body. (credit a: modification of work by Erskine Palmer and B.G. Partin—scale-bar data fromMatt Russell; credit b: modification of work by Rosmarie Voegtli)Latent viruses may remain dormant by existing as circular viral genome molecules outside of the host chromosome.Others become proviruses by integrating into the host genome. During dormancy, viruses do not cause any symptomsof disease and may be difficult to detect. A patient may be unaware that he or she is carrying the virus unless a viraldiagnostic test has been performed.260 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Chronic InfectionA chronic infection is a disease with symptoms that are recurrent or persistent over a long time. Some viral infectionscan be chronic if the body is unable to eliminate the virus. HIV is an example of a virus that produces a chronicinfection, often after a long period of latency. Once a person becomes infected with HIV, the virus can be detectedin tissues continuously thereafter, but untreated patients often experience no symptoms for years. However, thevirus maintains chronic persistence through several mechanisms that interfere with immune function, includingpreventing expression of viral antigens on the surface of infected cells, altering immune cells themselves, restrictingexpression of viral genes, and rapidly changing viral antigens through mutation. Eventually, the damage to theimmune system results in progression of the disease leading to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Thevarious mechanisms that HIV uses to avoid being cleared by the immune system are also used by other chronicallyinfecting viruses, including the hepatitis C virus.• In what two ways can a virus manage to maintain a persistent infection?Life Cycle of Viruses with Plant HostsPlant viruses are more similar to animal viruses than they are to bacteriophages. Plant viruses may be envelopedor non-enveloped. Like many animal viruses, plant viruses can have either a DNA or RNA genome and be singlestranded or double stranded. However, most plant viruses do not have a DNA genome; the majority have a +ssRNAgenome, which acts like messenger RNA (mRNA). Only a minority of plant viruses have other types of genomes.Plant viruses may have a narrow or broad host range. For example, the citrus tristeza virus infects only a few plantsof the Citrus genus, whereas the cucumber mosaic virus infects thousands of plants of various plant families. Mostplant viruses are transmitted by contact between plants, or by fungi, nematodes, insects, or other arthropods that act asmechanical vectors. However, some viruses can only be transferred by a specific type of insect vector; for example, aparticular virus might be transmitted by aphids but not whiteflies. In some cases, viruses may also enter healthy plantsthrough wounds, as might occur due to pruning or weather damage.Viruses that infect plants are considered biotrophic parasites, which means that they can establish an infection withoutkilling the host, similar to what is observed in the lysogenic life cycles of bacteriophages. Viral infection can beasymptomatic (latent) or can lead to cell death (lytic infection). The life cycle begins with the penetration of the virusinto the host cell. Next, the virus is uncoated within the cytoplasm of the cell when the capsid is removed. Dependingon the type of nucleic acid, cellular components are used to replicate the viral genome and synthesize viral proteinsfor assembly of new virions. To establish a systemic infection, the virus must enter a part of the vascular system ofthe plant, such as the phloem. The time required for systemic infection may vary from a few days to a few weeksdepending on the virus, the plant species, and the environmental conditions. The virus life cycle is complete when itis transmitted from an infected plant to a healthy plant.• What is the structure and genome of a typical plant virus?Viral Growth CurveUnlike the growth curve for a bacterial population, the growth curve for a virus population over its life cycle does notfollow a sigmoidal curve. During the initial stage, an inoculum of virus causes infection. In the eclipse phase, virusesbind and penetrate the cells with no virions detected in the medium. The chief difference that next appears in the viralChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 261growth curve compared to a bacterial growth curve occurs when virions are released from the lysed host cell at thesame time. Such an occurrence is called a burst, and the number of virions per bacterium released is described as theburst size. In a one-step multiplication curve for bacteriophage, the host cells lyse, releasing many viral particles tothe medium, which leads to a very steep rise in viral titer (the number of virions per unit volume). If no viable hostcells remain, the viral particles begin to degrade during the decline of the culture (see Figure 6.14).Figure 6.14 The one-step multiplication curve for a bacteriophage population follows three steps: 1) inoculation,during which the virions attach to host cells; 2) eclipse, during which entry of the viral genome occurs; and 3) burst,when sufficient numbers of new virions are produced and emerge from the host cell. The burst size is the maximumnumber of virions produced per bacterium.• What aspect of the life cycle of a virus leads to the sudden increase in the growth curve?Unregistered TreatmentsEbola is incurable and deadly. The outbreak in West Africa in 2014 was unprecedented, dwarfing other humanEbola epidemics in the level of mortality. Of 24,666 suspected or confirmed cases reported, 10,179 peopledied.[9]No approved treatments or vaccines for Ebola are available. While some drugs have shown potential inlaboratory studies and animal models, they have not been tested in humans for safety and effectiveness. Notonly are these drugs untested or unregistered but they are also in short supply.Given the great suffering and high mortality rates, it is fair to ask whether unregistered and untestedmedications are better than none at all. Should such drugs be dispensed and, if so, who should receive them,Eye on Ethics262 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5in light of their extremely limited supplies? Is it ethical to treat untested drugs on patients with Ebola? Onthe other hand, is it ethical to withhold potentially life-saving drugs from dying patients? Or should the drugsperhaps be reserved for health-care providers working to contain the disease?In August 2014, two infected US aid workers and a Spanish priest were treated with ZMapp, an unregistereddrug that had been tested in monkeys but not in humans. The two American aid workers recovered, but thepriest died. Later that month, the WHO released a report on the ethics of treating patients with the drug. SinceEbola is often fatal, the panel reasoned that it is ethical to give the unregistered drugs and unethical to withholdthem for safety concerns. This situation is an example of “compassionate use” outside the well-establishedsystem of regulation and governance of therapies.Ebola in the USOn September 24, 2014, Thomas Eric Duncan arrived at the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallascomplaining of a fever, headache, vomiting, and diarrhea—symptoms commonly observed in patients with thecold or the flu. After examination, an emergency department doctor diagnosed him with sinusitis, prescribedsome antibiotics, and sent him home. Two days later, Duncan returned to the hospital by ambulance. Hiscondition had deteriorated and additional blood tests confirmed that he has been infected with the Ebola virus.Further investigations revealed that Duncan had just returned from Liberia, one of the countries in the midstof a severe Ebola epidemic. On September 15, nine days before he showed up at the hospital in Dallas,Duncan had helped transport an Ebola-stricken neighbor to a hospital in Liberia. The hospital continued to treatDuncan, but he died several days after being admitted.The timeline of the Duncan case is indicative of the life cycle of the Ebola virus. The incubation time forEbola ranges from 2 days to 21 days. Nine days passed between Duncan’s exposure to the virus infectionand the appearance of his symptoms. This corresponds, in part, to the eclipse period in the growth of thevirus population. During the eclipse phase, Duncan would have been unable to transmit the disease to others.However, once an infected individual begins exhibiting symptoms, the disease becomes very contagious.Ebola virus is transmitted through direct contact with droplets of bodily fluids such as saliva, blood, and vomit.Duncan could conceivably have transmitted the disease to others at any time after he began having symptoms,presumably some time before his arrival at the hospital in Dallas. Once a hospital realizes a patient like Duncanis infected with Ebola virus, the patient is immediately quarantined, and public health officials initiate a backtrace to identify everyone with whom a patient like Duncan might have interacted during the period in which hewas showing symptoms.Public health officials were able to track down 10 high-risk individuals (family members of Duncan) and 50low-risk individuals to monitor them for signs of infection. None contracted the disease. However, one of thenurses charged with Duncan’s care did become infected. This, along with Duncan’s initial misdiagnosis, madeit clear that US hospitals needed to provide additional training to medical personnel to prevent a possible Ebolaoutbreak in the US.• What types of training can prepare health professionals to contain emerging epidemics like the Ebolaoutbreak of 2014?• What is the difference between a contagious pathogen and an infectious pathogen?Case in Point9. World Health Organization. “WHO Ebola Data and Statistics.” March 18, 2005. http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.ebola-sitrep.ebolasummary-20150318?lang=enChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 263Figure 6.15 Researchers working with Ebola virus use layers of defenses against accidental infection,including protective clothing, breathing systems, and negative air-pressure cabinets for bench work. (credit:modification of work by Randal J. Schoepp)For additional information about Ebola, please visit the CDC(https://www.openstax.org/l/22ebolacdc) website.6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of VirusesLearning Objectives• Discuss why viruses were originally described as filterable agents• Describe the cultivation of viruses and specimen collection and handling• Compare in vivo and in vitro techniques used to cultivate virusesAt the beginning of this chapter, we described how porcelain Chamberland filters with pores small enough to allowviruses to pass through were used to discover TMV. Today, porcelain filters have been replaced with membrane filtersand other devices used to isolate and identify viruses.Isolation of VirusesUnlike bacteria, many of which can be grown on an artificial nutrient medium, viruses require a living host cell forreplication. Infected host cells (eukaryotic or prokaryotic) can be cultured and grown, and then the growth mediumcan be harvested as a source of virus. Virions in the liquid medium can be separated from the host cells by eithercentrifugation or filtration. Filters can physically remove anything present in the solution that is larger than thevirions; the viruses can then be collected in the filtrate (see Figure 6.16).Link to Learning264 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 6.16 Membrane filters can be used to remove cells or viruses from a solution. (a) This scanning electronmicrograph shows rod-shaped bacterial cells captured on the surface of a membrane filter. Note differences in thecomparative size of the membrane pores and bacteria. Viruses will pass through this filter. (b) The size of the pores inthe filter determines what is captured on the surface of the filter (animal [red] and bacteria [blue]) and removed fromliquid passing through. Note the viruses (green) pass through the finer filter. (credit a: modification of work by U.S.Department of Energy)• What size filter pore is needed to collect a virus?Cultivation of VirusesViruses can be grown in vivo (within a whole living organism, plant, or animal) or in vitro (outside a living organismin cells in an artificial environment, such as a test tube, cell culture flask, or agar plate). Bacteriophages can be grownin the presence of a dense layer of bacteria (also called a bacterial lawn) grown in a 0.7 % soft agar in a Petri dish orflat (horizontal) flask (see Figure 6.17). The agar concentration is decreased from the 1.5% usually used in culturingbacteria. The soft 0.7% agar allows the bacteriophages to easily diffuse through the medium. For lytic bacteriophages,lysing of the bacterial hosts can then be readily observed when a clear zone called a plaque is detected (see Figure6.17). As the phage kills the bacteria, many plaques are observed among the cloudy bacterial lawn.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 265Figure 6.17 (a) Flasks like this may be used to culture human or animal cells for viral culturing. (b) These platescontain bacteriophage T4 grown on an Escherichia coli lawn. Clear plaques are visible where host bacterial cellshave been lysed. Viral titers increase on the plates to the left. (credit a: modification of work by National Institutes ofHealth; credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Animal viruses require cells within a host animal or tissue-culture cells derived from an animal. Animal viruscultivation is important for 1) identification and diagnosis of pathogenic viruses in clinical specimens, 2) productionof vaccines, and 3) basic research studies. In vivo host sources can be a developing embryo in an embryonated bird’segg (e.g., chicken, turkey) or a whole animal. For example, most of the influenza vaccine manufactured for annual fluvaccination programs is cultured in hens’ eggs.The embryo or host animal serves as an incubator for viral replication (see Figure 6.18). Location within the embryoor host animal is important. Many viruses have a tissue tropism, and must therefore be introduced into a specificsite for growth. Within an embryo, target sites include the amniotic cavity, the chorioallantoic membrane, or the yolksac. Viral infection may damage tissue membranes, producing lesions called pox; disrupt embryonic development; orcause the death of the embryo.Figure 6.18 (a) The cells within chicken eggs are used to culture different types of viruses. (b) Viruses can bereplicated in various locations within the egg, including the chorioallantoic membrane, the amniotic cavity, and theyolk sac. (credit a: modification of work by “Chung Hoang”/YouTube)For in vitro studies, various types of cells can be used to support the growth of viruses. A primary cell culture isfreshly prepared from animal organs or tissues. Cells are extracted from tissues by mechanical scraping or mincing torelease cells or by an enzymatic method using trypsin or collagenase to break up tissue and release single cells intosuspension. Because of anchorage-dependence requirements, primary cell cultures require a liquid culture mediumin a Petri dish or tissue-culture flask so cells have a solid surface such as glass or plastic for attachment and growth.Primary cultures usually have a limited life span. When cells in a primary culture undergo mitosis and a sufficientdensity of cells is produced, cells come in contact with other cells. When this cell-to-cell-contact occurs, mitosis is266 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5triggered to stop. This is called contact inhibition and it prevents the density of the cells from becoming too high. Toprevent contact inhibition, cells from the primary cell culture must be transferred to another vessel with fresh growthmedium. This is called a secondary cell culture. Periodically, cell density must be reduced by pouring off some cellsand adding fresh medium to provide space and nutrients to maintain cell growth. In contrast to primary cell cultures,continuous cell lines, usually derived from transformed cells or tumors, are often able to be subcultured many timesor even grown indefinitely (in which case they are called immortal). Continuous cell lines may not exhibit anchoragedependency (they will grow in suspension) and may have lost their contact inhibition. As a result, continuous celllines can grow in piles or lumps resembling small tumor growths (see Figure 6.19).Figure 6.19 Cells for culture are prepared by separating them from their tissue matrix. (a) Primary cell cultures growattached to the surface of the culture container. Contact inhibition slows the growth of the cells once they become toodense and begin touching each other. At this point, growth can only be sustained by making a secondary culture. (b)Continuous cell cultures are not affected by contact inhibition. They continue to grow regardless of cell density. (credit“micrographs”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)An example of an immortal cell line is the HeLa cell line, which was originally cultivated from tumor cells obtainedfrom Henrietta Lacks, a patient who died of cervical cancer in 1951. HeLa cells were the first continuous tissueculturecell line and were used to establish tissue culture as an important technology for research in cell biology,virology, and medicine. Prior to the discovery of HeLa cells, scientists were not able to establish tissue cultures withany reliability or stability. More than six decades later, this cell line is still alive and being used for medical research.See Eye on Ethics: The Immortal Cell Line of Henrietta Lacks to read more about this important cell lineand the controversial means by which it was obtained.• What property of cells makes periodic dilutions of primary cell cultures necessary?Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 267The Immortal Cell Line of Henrietta LacksIn January 1951, Henrietta Lacks, a 30-year-old African American woman from Baltimore, was diagnosed withcervical cancer at John Hopkins Hospital. We now know her cancer was caused by the human papillomavirus(HPV). Cytopathic effects of the virus altered the characteristics of her cells in a process called transformation,which gives the cells the ability to divide continuously. This ability, of course, resulted in a cancerous tumor thateventually killed Mrs. Lacks in October at age 31. Before her death, samples of her cancerous cells were takenwithout her knowledge or permission. The samples eventually ended up in the possession of Dr. George Gey,a biomedical researcher at Johns Hopkins University. Gey was able to grow some of the cells from Lacks’ssample, creating what is known today as the immortal HeLa cell line. These cells have the ability to live andgrow indefinitely and, even today, are still widely used in many areas of research.According to Lacks’s husband, neither Henrietta nor the family gave the hospital permission to collect hertissue specimen. Indeed, the family was not aware until 20 years after Lacks’s death that her cells were stillalive and actively being used for commercial and research purposes. Yet HeLa cells have been pivotal innumerous research discoveries related to polio, cancer, and AIDS, among other diseases. The cells have alsobeen commercialized, although they have never themselves been patented. Despite this, Henrietta Lacks’sestate has never benefited from the use of the cells, although, in 2013, the Lacks family was given control overthe publication of the genetic sequence of her cells.This case raises several bioethical issues surrounding patients’ informed consent and the right to know. At thetime Lacks’s tissues were taken, there were no laws or guidelines about informed consent. Does that meanshe was treated fairly at the time? Certainly by today’s standards, the answer would be no. Harvesting tissue ororgans from a dying patient without consent is not only considered unethical but illegal, regardless of whethersuch an act could save other patients’ lives. Is it ethical, then, for scientists to continue to use Lacks’s tissuesfor research, even though they were obtained illegally by today’s standards?Ethical or not, Lacks’s cells are widely used today for so many applications that it is impossible to list them all.Is this a case in which the ends justify the means? Would Lacks be pleased to know about her contribution toscience and the millions of people who have benefited? Would she want her family to be compensated for thecommercial products that have been developed using her cells? Or would she feel violated and exploited bythe researchers who took part of her body without her consent? Because she was never asked, we will neverknow.Figure 6.20 A multiphoton fluorescence image of HeLa cells in culture. Various fluorescent stains have beenused to show the DNA (cyan), microtubules (green), and Golgi apparatus (orange). (credit: modification ofwork by National Institutes of Health)Detection of a VirusRegardless of the method of cultivation, once a virus has been introduced into a whole host organism, embryo, orEye on Ethics268 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5tissue-culture cell, a sample can be prepared from the infected host, embryo, or cell line for further analysis under abrightfield, electron, or fluorescent microscope. Cytopathic effects (CPEs) are distinct observable cell abnormalitiesdue to viral infection. CPEs can include loss of adherence to the surface of the container, changes in cell shape fromflat to round, shrinkage of the nucleus, vacuoles in the cytoplasm, fusion of cytoplasmic membranes and the formationof multinucleated syncytia, inclusion bodies in the nucleus or cytoplasm, and complete cell lysis (see Figure 6.21).Further pathological changes include viral disruption of the host genome and altering normal cells into transformedcells, which are the types of cells associated with carcinomas and sarcomas. The type or severity of the CPE dependson the type of virus involved. Figure 6.21 lists CPEs for specific viruses.Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 269Figure 6.21 (credit “micrographs”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)270 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Watch this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22virusesoncell) to learn aboutthe effects of viruses on cells.Hemagglutination AssayA serological assay is used to detect the presence of certain types of viruses in patient serum. Serum is the strawcoloredliquid fraction of blood plasma from which clotting factors have been removed. Serum can be used in a directassay called a hemagglutination assay to detect specific types of viruses in the patient’s sample. Hemagglutinationis the agglutination (clumping) together of erythrocytes (red blood cells). Many viruses produce surface proteinsor spikes called hemagglutinins that can bind to receptors on the membranes of erythrocytes and cause the cellsto agglutinate. Hemagglutination is observable without using the microscope, but this method does not alwaysdifferentiate between infectious and noninfectious viral particles, since both can agglutinate erythrocytes.To identify a specific pathogenic virus using hemagglutination, we must use an indirect approach. Proteins calledantibodies, generated by the patient’s immune system to fight a specific virus, can be used to bind to componentssuch as hemagglutinins that are uniquely associated with specific types of viruses. The binding of the antibodies withthe hemagglutinins found on the virus subsequently prevent erythrocytes from directly interacting with the virus. Sowhen erythrocytes are added to the antibody-coated viruses, there is no appearance of agglutination; agglutination hasbeen inhibited. We call these types of indirect assays for virus-specific antibodies hemagglutination inhibition (HAI)assays. HAI can be used to detect the presence of antibodies specific to many types of viruses that may be causing orhave caused an infection in a patient even months or years after infection (see Figure 6.22). This assay is describedin greater detail in Agglutination Assays.Link to LearningChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 271Figure 6.22 This chart shows the possible outcomes of a hemagglutination test. Row A: Erythrocytes do not bindtogether and will sink to the bottom of the well plate; this becomes visible as a red dot in the center of the well. RowB: Many viruses have hemagglutinins that causes agglutination of erythrocytes; the resulting hemagglutination formsa lattice structure that results in red color throughout the well. Row C: Virus-specific antibody, the viruses, and theerythrocytes are added to the well plate. The virus-specific antibodies inhibit agglutination, as can be seen as a reddot in the bottom of the well. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the outcome of a positive HIA test?Nucleic Acid Amplification TestNucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) are used in molecular biology to detect unique nucleic acid sequences ofviruses in patient samples. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of viral DNAin a patient’s tissue or body fluid sample. PCR is a technique that amplifies (i.e., synthesizes many copies) of a viralDNA segment of interest. Using PCR, short nucleotide sequences called primers bind to specific sequences of viralDNA, enabling identification of the virus.Reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of RNA viruses. RT-PCR differs fromPCR in that the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT) is used to make a cDNA from the small amount of viral RNA inthe specimen. The cDNA can then be amplified by PCR. Both PCR and RT-PCR are used to detect and confirm thepresence of the viral nucleic acid in patient specimens.272 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5HPV ScareMichelle, a 21-year-old nursing student, came to the university clinic worried that she might have been exposedto a sexually transmitted disease (STD). Her sexual partner had recently developed several bumps on the baseof his penis. He had put off going to the doctor, but Michelle suspects they are genital warts caused by HPV.She is especially concerned because she knows that HPV not only causes warts but is a prominent cause ofcervical cancer. She and her partner always use condoms for contraception, but she is not confident that thisprecaution will protect her from HPV.Michelle’s physician finds no physical signs of genital warts or any other STDs, but recommends that Michelleget a Pap smear along with an HPV test. The Pap smear will screen for abnormal cervical cells and the CPEsassociated with HPV; the HPV test will test for the presence of the virus. If both tests are negative, Michellecan be more assured that she most likely has not become infected with HPV. However, her doctor suggests itmight be wise for Michelle to get vaccinated against HPV to protect herself from possible future exposure.• Why does Michelle’s physician order two different tests instead of relying on one or the other?Enzyme ImmunoassayEnzyme immunoassays (EIAs) rely on the ability of antibodies to detect and attach to specific biomolecules calledantigens. The detecting antibody attaches to the target antigen with a high degree of specificity in what might be acomplex mixture of biomolecules. Also included in this type of assay is a colorless enzyme attached to the detectingantibody. The enzyme acts as a tag on the detecting antibody and can interact with a colorless substrate, leading tothe production of a colored end product. EIAs often rely on layers of antibodies to capture and react with antigens, allof which are attached to a membrane filter (see Figure 6.23). EIAs for viral antigens are often used as preliminaryscreening tests. If the results are positive, further confirmation will require tests with even greater sensitivity, such asa western blot or an NAAT. EIAs are discussed in more detail in EIAs and ELISAs.Case in PointChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 273Figure 6.23 Similar to rapid, over-the-counter pregnancy tests, EIAs for viral antigens require a few drops of dilutedpatient serum or plasma applied to a membrane filter. The membrane filter has been previously modified andembedded with antibody to viral antigen and internal controls. Antibody conjugate is added to the filter, with thetargeted antibody attached to the antigen (in the case of a positive test). Excess conjugate is washed off the filter.Substrate is added to activate the enzyme-mediated reaction to reveal the color change of a positive test. (credit:modification of work by “Cavitri”/Wikimedia Commons)274 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What typically indicates a positive EIA test?Part 3Along with the RT/PCR analysis, David’s saliva was also collected for viral cultivation. In general, no singlediagnostic test is sufficient for antemortem diagnosis, since the results will depend on the sensitivity of theassay, the quantity of virions present at the time of testing, and the timing of the assay, since release ofvirions in the saliva can vary. As it turns out, the result was negative for viral cultivation from the saliva. Thisis not surprising to David’s doctor, because one negative result is not an absolute indication of the absence ofinfection. It may be that the number of virions in the saliva is low at the time of sampling. It is not unusual torepeat the test at intervals to enhance the chance of detecting higher virus loads.• Should David’s doctor modify his course of treatment based on these test results?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and PrionsLearning Objectives• Describe viroids and their unique characteristics• Describe virusoids and their unique characteristics• Describe prions and their unique characteristicsResearch attempts to discover the causative agents of previously uninvestigated diseases have led to the discoveryof nonliving disease agents quite different from viruses. These include particles consisting only of RNA or only ofprotein that, nonetheless, are able to self-propagate at the expense of a host—a key similarity to viruses that allowsthem to cause disease conditions. To date, these discoveries include viroids, virusoids, and the proteinaceous prions.ViroidsIn 1971, Theodor Diener, a pathologist working at the Agriculture Research Service, discovered an acellular particlethat he named a viroid, meaning “virus-like.” Viroids consist only of a short strand of circular RNA capable of selfreplication.The first viroid discovered was found to cause potato tuber spindle disease, which causes slower sproutingand various deformities in potato plants (see Figure 6.24). Like viruses, potato spindle tuber viroids (PSTVs) takecontrol of the host machinery to replicate their RNA genome. Unlike viruses, viroids do not have a protein coat toprotect their genetic information.Clinical FocusChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 275Figure 6.24 These potatoes have been infected by the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV), which is typically spreadwhen infected knives are used to cut healthy potatoes, which are then planted. (credit: Pamela Roberts, University ofFlorida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, USDA ARS)Viroids can result in devastating losses of commercially important agricultural food crops grown in fields andorchards. Since the discovery of PSTV, other viroids have been discovered that cause diseases in plants. Tomatoplanta macho viroid (TPMVd) infects tomato plants, which causes loss of chlorophyll, disfigured and brittle leaves,and very small tomatoes, resulting in loss of productivity in this field crop. Avocado sunblotch viroid (ASBVd)results in lower yields and poorer-quality fruit. ASBVd is the smallest viroid discovered thus far that infects plants.Peach latent mosaic viroid (PLMVd) can cause necrosis of flower buds and branches, and wounding of ripened fruit,which leads to fungal and bacterial growth in the fruit. PLMVd can also cause similar pathological changes in plums,nectarines, apricots, and cherries, resulting in decreased productivity in these orchards, as well. Viroids, in general,can be dispersed mechanically during crop maintenance or harvesting, vegetative reproduction, and possibly via seedsand insects, resulting in a severe drop in food availability and devastating economic consequences.• What is the genome of a viroid made of?VirusoidsA second type of pathogenic RNA that can infect commercially important agricultural crops are the virusoids, whichare subviral particles best described as non–self-replicating ssRNAs. RNA replication of virusoids is similar to thatof viroids but, unlike viroids, virusoids require that the cell also be infected with a specific “helper” virus. Thereare currently only five described types of virusoids and their associated helper viruses. The helper viruses are allfrom the family of Sobemoviruses. An example of a helper virus is the subterranean clover mottle virus, whichhas an associated virusoid packaged inside the viral capsid. Once the helper virus enters the host cell, the virusoidsare released and can be found free in plant cell cytoplasm, where they possess ribozyme activity. The helper virusundergoes typical viral replication independent of the activity of the virusoid. The virusoid genomes are small, only220 to 388 nucleotides long. A virusoid genome does not code for any proteins, but instead serves only to replicatevirusoid RNA.Virusoids belong to a larger group of infectious agents called satellite RNAs, which are similar pathogenic RNAsfound in animals. Unlike the plant virusoids, satellite RNAs may encode for proteins; however, like plant virusoids,satellite RNAs must coinfect with a helper virus to replicate. One satellite RNA that infects humans and that has beendescribed by some scientists as a virusoid is the hepatitis delta virus (HDV), which, by some reports, is also calledhepatitis delta virusoid. Much larger than a plant virusoid, HDV has a circular, ssRNA genome of 1,700 nucleotidesand can direct the biosynthesis of HDV-associated proteins. The HDV helper virus is the hepatitis B virus (HBV).Coinfection with HBV and HDV results in more severe pathological changes in the liver during infection, which is276 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5how HDV was first discovered.• What is the main difference between a viroid and a virusoid?PrionsAt one time, scientists believed that any infectious particle must contain DNA or RNA. Then, in 1982, StanleyPrusiner, a medical doctor studying scrapie (a fatal, degenerative disease in sheep) discovered that the disease wascaused by proteinaceous infectious particles, or prions. Because proteins are acellular and do not contain DNA orRNA, Prusiner’s findings were originally met with resistance and skepticism; however, his research was eventuallyvalidated, and he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997.A prion is a misfolded rogue form of a normal protein (PrPc) found in the cell. This rogue prion protein (PrPsc), whichmay be caused by a genetic mutation or occur spontaneously, can be infectious, stimulating other endogenous normalproteins to become misfolded, forming plaques (see Figure 6.25). Today, prions are known to cause various formsof transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) in human and animals. TSE is a rare degenerative disorder thataffects the brain and nervous system. The accumulation of rogue proteins causes the brain tissue to become spongelike,killing brain cells and forming holes in the tissue, leading to brain damage, loss of motor coordination, anddementia (see Figure 6.26). Infected individuals are mentally impaired and become unable to move or speak. Thereis no cure, and the disease progresses rapidly, eventually leading to death within a few months or years.Figure 6.25 Endogenous normal prion protein (PrPc) is converted into the disease-causing form (PrPsc) when itencounters this variant form of the protein. PrPsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue, especially if a mutant formof the protein is present, or it may originate from misfolded prions consumed in food that eventually find their way intobrain tissue. (credit b: modification of work by USDA)Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 277Figure 6.26 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal disease that causes degeneration of neural tissue. (a) Thesebrain scans compare a normal brain to one with CJD. (b) Compared to a normal brain, the brain tissue of a CJDpatient is full of sponge-like lesions, which result from abnormal formations of prion protein. (credit a (right):modification of work by Dr. Laughlin Dawes; credit b (top): modification of work by Suzanne Wakim; credit b (bottom):modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)TSEs in humans include kuru, fatal familial insomnia, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (see Figure 6.26). TSEs in animals include mad cow disease, scrapie (in sheep and goats), and chronicwasting disease (in elk and deer). TSEs can be transmitted between animals and from animals to humans by eatingcontaminated meat or animal feed. Transmission between humans can occur through heredity (as is often the case withGSS and CJD) or by contact with contaminated tissue, as might occur during a blood transfusion or organ transplant.There is no evidence for transmission via casual contact with an infected person. Table 6.3 lists TSEs that affecthumans and their modes of transmission.Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs) in HumansDisease Mechanism(s) of Transmission[10]Sporadic CJD (sCJD) Not known; possibly by alteration of normal prior protein (PrP) to rogue formdue to somatic mutationVariant CJD (vCJD) Eating contaminated cattle products and by secondary bloodbornetransmissionFamilial CJD (fCJD) Mutation in germline PrP geneIatrogenic CJD (iCJD) Contaminated neurosurgical instruments, corneal graft, gonadotrophichormone, and, secondarily, by blood transfusionKuru Eating infected meat through ritualistic cannibalismGerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease (GSS)Mutation in germline PrP geneTable 6.310. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/cjd/detail_cjd.htm (accessed December 31, 2015).278 Chapter 6 | Acellular PathogensThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs) in HumansDisease Mechanism(s) of TransmissionFatal familial insomnia (FFI) Mutation in germline PrP geneTable 6.3Prions are extremely difficult to destroy because they are resistant to heat, chemicals, and radiation. Even standardsterilization procedures do not ensure the destruction of these particles. Currently, there is no treatment or cure forTSE disease, and contaminated meats or infected animals must be handled according to federal guidelines to preventtransmission.• Does a prion have a genome?For more information on the handling of animals and prion-contaminatedmaterials, visit the guidelines published on the CDC(https://www.openstax.org/l/22cdccontaminat) and WHO(https://www.openstax.org/l/22whocontaminat) websites.ResolutionA few days later, David’s doctor receives the results of the immunofluorescence test on his skin sample. Thetest is negative for rabies antigen. A second viral antigen test on his saliva sample also comes back negative.Despite these results, the doctor decides to continue David’s current course of treatment. Given the positiveRT-PCR test, it is best not to rule out a possible rabies infection.Near the site of the bite, David receives an injection of rabies immunoglobulin, which attaches to andinactivates any rabies virus that may be present in his tissues. Over the next 14 days, he receives a series offour rabies-specific vaccinations in the arm. These vaccines activate David’s immune response and help hisbody recognize and fight the virus. Thankfully, with treatment, David symptoms improve and he makes a fullrecovery.Not all rabies cases have such a fortunate outcome. In fact, rabies is usually fatal once the patient starts toexhibit symptoms, and postbite treatments are mainly palliative (i.e., sedation and pain management).Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Link to LearningClinical FocusChapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens 279Summary6.1 Viruses• Viruses are generally ultramicroscopic, typically from 20 nm to 900 nm in length. Some large viruses havebeen found.• Virions are acellular and consist of a nucleic acid, DNA or RNA, but not both, surrounded by a protein capsid.There may also be a phospholipid membrane surrounding the capsid.• Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites.• Viruses are known to infect various types of cells found in plants, animals, fungi, protists, bacteria, andarchaea. Viruses typically have limited host ranges and infect specific cell types.• Viruses may have helical, polyhedral, or complex shapes.• Classification of viruses is based on morphology, type of nucleic acid, host range, cell specificity, and enzymescarried within the virion.• Like other diseases, viral diseases are classified using ICD codes.6.2 The Viral Life Cycle• Many viruses target specific hosts or tissues. Some may have more than one host.• Many viruses follow several stages to infect host cells. These stages include attachment, penetration,uncoating, biosynthesis, maturation, and release.• Bacteriophages have a lytic or lysogenic cycle. The lytic cycle leads to the death of the host, whereas thelysogenic cycle leads to integration of phage into the host genome.• Bacteriophages inject DNA into the host cell, whereas animal viruses enter by endocytosis or membranefusion.• Animal viruses can undergo latency, similar to lysogeny for a bacteriophage.• The majority of plant viruses are positive-strand ssRNA and can undergo latency, chronic, or lytic infection,as observed for animal viruses.• The growth curve of bacteriophage populations is a one-step multiplication curve and not a sigmoidal curve,as compared to the bacterial growth curve.• Bacteriophages transfer genetic information between hosts using either generalized or specializedtransduction.6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses• Viral cultivation requires the presence of some form of host cell (whole organism, embryo, or cell culture).• Viruses can be isolated from samples by filtration.• Viral filtrate is a rich source of released virions.• Bacteriophages are detected by presence of clear plaques on bacterial lawn.• Animal and plant viruses are detected by cytopathic effects, molecular techniques (PCR, RT-PCR), enzymeimmunoassays, and serological assays (hemagglutination assay, hemagglutination inhibition assay).6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions• Other acellular agents such as viroids, virusoids, and prions also cause diseases. Viroids consist of small,naked ssRNAs that cause diseases in plants. Virusoids are ssRNAs that require other helper viruses toestablish an infection. Prions are proteinaceous infectious particles that cause transmissible spongiformencephalopathies.• Prions are extremely resistant to chemicals, heat, and radiation.• There are no treatments for prion infection.