Chapter 13Control of Microbial GrowthFigure 13.1 Most environments, including cars, are not sterile. A study[1] analyzed 11 locations within 18 differentcars to determine the number of microbial colony-forming units (CFUs) present. The center console harbored by farthe most microbes (506 CFUs), possibly because that is where drinks are placed (and often spilled). Frequentlytouched sites also had high concentrations. (credit “photo”: modification of work by Jeff Wilcox)Chapter Outline13.1 Controlling Microbial Growth13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms13.3 Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms13.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics and DisinfectantsIntroductionHow clean is clean? People wash their cars and vacuum the carpets, but most would not want to eat from thesesurfaces. Similarly, we might eat with silverware cleaned in a dishwasher, but we could not use the same dishwasherto clean surgical instruments. As these examples illustrate, “clean” is a relative term. Car washing, vacuuming, anddishwashing all reduce the microbial load on the items treated, thus making them “cleaner.” But whether they are“clean enough” depends on their intended use. Because people do not normally eat from cars or carpets, these itemsdo not require the same level of cleanliness that silverware does. Likewise, because silverware is not used for invasivesurgery, these utensils do not require the same level of cleanliness as surgical equipment, which requires sterilizationto prevent infection.Why not play it safe and sterilize everything? Sterilizing everything we come in contact with is impractical, as well aspotentially dangerous. As this chapter will demonstrate, sterilization protocols often require time- and labor-intensivetreatments that may degrade the quality of the item being treated or have toxic effects on users. Therefore, the usermust consider the item’s intended application when choosing a cleaning method to ensure that it is “clean enough.”1. R.E. Stephenson et al. “Elucidation of Bacteria Found in Car Interiors and Strategies to Reduce the Presence of Potential Pathogens.”Biofouling 30 no. 3 (2014):337–346.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 55313.1 Controlling Microbial GrowthLearning Objectives• Compare disinfectants, antiseptics, and sterilants• Describe the principles of controlling the presence of microorganisms through sterilization and disinfection• Differentiate between microorganisms of various biological safety levels and explain methods used for handlingmicrobes at each levelTo prevent the spread of human disease, it is necessary to control the growth and abundance of microbes in or onvarious items frequently used by humans. Inanimate items, such as doorknobs, toys, or towels, which may harbormicrobes and aid in disease transmission, are called fomites. Two factors heavily influence the level of cleanlinessrequired for a particular fomite and, hence, the protocol chosen to achieve this level. The first factor is the applicationfor which the item will be used. For example, invasive applications that require insertion into the human body requirea much higher level of cleanliness than applications that do not. The second factor is the level of resistance toantimicrobial treatment by potential pathogens. For example, foods preserved by canning often become contaminatedwith the bacterium Clostridium botulinum, which produces the neurotoxin that causes botulism. Because C. botulinumcan produce endospores that can survive harsh conditions, extreme temperatures and pressures must be used toeliminate the endospores. Other organisms may not require such extreme measures and can be controlled by aprocedure such as washing clothes in a laundry machine.Laboratory Biological Safety LevelsFor researchers or laboratory personnel working with pathogens, the risks associated with specific pathogensdetermine the levels of cleanliness and control required. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) andthe National Institutes of Health (NIH) have established four classification levels, called “biological safety levels”(BSLs). Various organizations around the world, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the EuropeanUnion (EU), use a similar classification scheme. According to the CDC, the BSL is determined by the agent’sinfectivity, ease of transmission, and potential disease severity, as well as the type of work being done with theagent.[2]Each BSL requires a different level of biocontainment to prevent contamination and spread of infectious agentsto laboratory personnel and, ultimately, the community. For example, the lowest BSL, BSL-1, requires the fewestPart 1Roberta is a 46-year-old real estate agent who recently underwent a cholecystectomy (surgery to removepainful gallstones). The surgery was performed laparoscopically with the aid of a duodenoscope, a specializedendoscope that allows surgeons to see inside the body with the aid of a tiny camera. On returning homefrom the hospital, Roberta developed abdominal pain and a high fever. She also experienced a burningsensation during urination and noticed blood in her urine. She notified her surgeon of these symptoms, per herpostoperative instructions.• What are some possible causes of Roberta’s symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus2. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Recognizing the Biosafety Levels.” http://www.cdc.gov/training/quicklearns/biosafety/.Accessed June 7, 2016.554 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5precautions because it applies to situations with the lowest risk for microbial infection.BSL-1 agents are those that generally do not cause infection in healthy human adults. These include noninfectiousbacteria, such as nonpathogenic strains of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, and viruses known to infect animalsother than humans, such as baculoviruses (insect viruses). Because working with BSL-1 agents poses very little risk,few precautions are necessary. Laboratory workers use standard aseptic technique and may work with these agents atan open laboratory bench or table, wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) such as a laboratory coat, goggles,and gloves, as needed. Other than a sink for handwashing and doors to separate the laboratory from the rest of thebuilding, no additional modifications are needed.Agents classified as BSL-2 include those that pose moderate risk to laboratory workers and the community, andare typically “indigenous,” meaning that they are commonly found in that geographical area. These include bacteriasuch as Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella spp., and viruses like hepatitis, mumps, and measles viruses. BSL-2laboratories require additional precautions beyond those of BSL-1, including restricted access; required PPE,including a face shield in some circumstances; and the use of biological safety cabinets for procedures that maydisperse agents through the air (called “aerosolization”). BSL-2 laboratories are equipped with self-closing doors,an eyewash station, and an autoclave, which is a specialized device for sterilizing materials with pressurized steambefore use or disposal. BSL-1 laboratories may also have an autoclave.BSL-3 agents have the potential to cause lethal infections by inhalation. These may be either indigenous or “exotic,”meaning that they are derived from a foreign location, and include pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis,Bacillus anthracis, West Nile virus, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Because of the serious nature of theinfections caused by BSL-3 agents, laboratories working with them require restricted access. Laboratory workers areunder medical surveillance, possibly receiving vaccinations for the microbes with which they work. In addition to thestandard PPE already mentioned, laboratory personnel in BSL-3 laboratories must also wear a respirator and workwith microbes and infectious agents in a biological safety cabinet at all times. BSL-3 laboratories require a handsfreesink, an eyewash station near the exit, and two sets of self-closing and locking doors at the entrance. Theselaboratories are equipped with directional airflow, meaning that clean air is pulled through the laboratory from cleanareas to potentially contaminated areas. This air cannot be recirculated, so a constant supply of clean air is required.BSL-4 agents are the most dangerous and often fatal. These microbes are typically exotic, are easily transmitted byinhalation, and cause infections for which there are no treatments or vaccinations. Examples include Ebola virusand Marburg virus, both of which cause hemorrhagic fevers, and smallpox virus. There are only a small number oflaboratories in the United States and around the world appropriately equipped to work with these agents. In addition toBSL-3 precautions, laboratory workers in BSL-4 facilities must also change their clothing on entering the laboratory,shower on exiting, and decontaminate all material on exiting. While working in the laboratory, they must either weara full-body protective suit with a designated air supply or conduct all work within a biological safety cabinet with ahigh-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)-filtered air supply and a doubly HEPA-filtered exhaust. If wearing a suit, theair pressure within the suit must be higher than that outside the suit, so that if a leak in the suit occurs, laboratory airthat may be contaminated cannot be drawn into the suit (Figure 13.2). The laboratory itself must be located eitherin a separate building or in an isolated portion of a building and have its own air supply and exhaust system, as wellas its own decontamination system. The BSLs are summarized in Figure 13.3.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 555Figure 13.2 A protective suit like this one is an additional precaution for those who work in BSL-4 laboratories. Thissuit has its own air supply and maintains a positive pressure relative to the outside, so that if a leak occurs, air willflow out of the suit, not into it from the laboratory. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)556 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 13.3 The CDC classifies infectious agents into four biosafety levels based on potential risk to laboratorypersonnel and the community. Each level requires a progressively greater level of precaution. (credit “pyramid”:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22cdcfourbsls) about the four BSLs,visit the CDC’s website.• What are some factors used to determine the BSL necessary for working with a specific pathogen?SterilizationThe most extreme protocols for microbial control aim to achieve sterilization: the complete removal or killing of allvegetative cells, endospores, and viruses from the targeted item or environment. Sterilization protocols are generallyreserved for laboratory, medical, manufacturing, and food industry settings, where it may be imperative for certainitems to be completely free of potentially infectious agents. Sterilization can be accomplished through either physicalLink to LearningChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 557means, such as exposure to high heat, pressure, or filtration through an appropriate filter, or by chemical means.Chemicals that can be used to achieve sterilization are called sterilants. Sterilants effectively kill all microbes andviruses, and, with appropriate exposure time, can also kill endospores.For many clinical purposes, aseptic technique is necessary to prevent contamination of sterile surfaces. Aseptictechnique involves a combination of protocols that collectively maintain sterility, or asepsis, thus preventingcontamination of the patient with microbes and infectious agents. Failure to practice aseptic technique during manytypes of clinical procedures may introduce microbes to the patient’s body and put the patient at risk for sepsis,a systemic inflammatory response to an infection that results in high fever, increased heart and respiratory rates,shock, and, possibly, death. Medical procedures that carry risk of contamination must be performed in a sterilefield, a designated area that is kept free of all vegetative microbes, endospores, and viruses. Sterile fields are createdaccording to protocols requiring the use of sterilized materials, such as packaging and drapings, and strict proceduresfor washing and application of sterilants. Other protocols are followed to maintain the sterile field while the medicalprocedure is being performed.One food sterilization protocol, commercial sterilization, uses heat at a temperature low enough to preserve foodquality but high enough to destroy common pathogens responsible for food poisoning, such as C. botulinum. BecauseC. botulinum and its endospores are commonly found in soil, they may easily contaminate crops during harvesting,and these endospores can later germinate within the anaerobic environment once foods are canned. Metal cans offood contaminated with C. botulinum will bulge due to the microbe’s production of gases; contaminated jars of foodtypically bulge at the metal lid. To eliminate the risk for C. botulinum contamination, commercial food-canningprotocols are designed with a large margin of error. They assume an impossibly large population of endospores (1012per can) and aim to reduce this population to 1 endospore per can to ensure the safety of canned foods. For example,low- and medium-acid foods are heated to 121 °C for a minimum of 2.52 minutes, which is the time it would taketo reduce a population of 1012 endospores per can down to 1 endospore at this temperature. Even so, commercialsterilization does not eliminate the presence of all microbes; rather, it targets those pathogens that cause spoilage andfoodborne diseases, while allowing many nonpathogenic organisms to survive. Therefore, “sterilization” is somewhatof a misnomer in this context, and commercial sterilization may be more accurately described as “quasi-sterilization.”• What is the difference between sterilization and aseptic technique?The Association of Surgical Technologists publishes standards(https://openstax.org/l/22ASTstanasepte) for aseptic technique, includingcreating and maintaining a sterile field.Other Methods of ControlSterilization protocols require procedures that are not practical, or necessary, in many settings. Various other methodsare used in clinical and nonclinical settings to reduce the microbial load on items. Although the terms for thesemethods are often used interchangeably, there are important distinctions (Figure 13.4).The process of disinfection inactivates most microbes on the surface of a fomite by using antimicrobial chemicals orheat. Because some microbes remain, the disinfected item is not considered sterile. Ideally, disinfectants should befast acting, stable, easy to prepare, inexpensive, and easy to use. An example of a natural disinfectant is vinegar; itsLink to Learning558 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5acidity kills most microbes. Chemical disinfectants, such as chlorine bleach or products containing chlorine, are usedto clean nonliving surfaces such as laboratory benches, clinical surfaces, and bathroom sinks. Typical disinfectiondoes not lead to sterilization because endospores tend to survive even when all vegetative cells have been killed.Unlike disinfectants, antiseptics are antimicrobial chemicals safe for use on living skin or tissues. Examplesof antiseptics include hydrogen peroxide and isopropyl alcohol. The process of applying an antiseptic is calledantisepsis. In addition to the characteristics of a good disinfectant, antiseptics must also be selectively effectiveagainst microorganisms and able to penetrate tissue deeply without causing tissue damage.The type of protocol required to achieve the desired level of cleanliness depends on the particular item to be cleaned.For example, those used clinically are categorized as critical, semicritical, and noncritical. Critical items must besterile because they will be used inside the body, often penetrating sterile tissues or the bloodstream; examples ofcritical items include surgical instruments, catheters, and intravenous fluids. Gastrointestinal endoscopes and varioustypes of equipment for respiratory therapies are examples of semicritical items; they may contact mucous membranesor nonintact skin but do not penetrate tissues. Semicritical items do not typically need to be sterilized but do requirea high level of disinfection. Items that may contact but not penetrate intact skin are noncritical items; examples arebed linens, furniture, crutches, stethoscopes, and blood pressure cuffs. These articles need to be clean but not highlydisinfected.The act of handwashing is an example of degerming, in which microbial numbers are significantly reduced bygently scrubbing living tissue, most commonly skin, with a mild chemical (e.g., soap) to avoid the transmission ofpathogenic microbes. Wiping the skin with an alcohol swab at an injection site is another example of degerming.These degerming methods remove most (but not all) microbes from the skin’s surface.The term sanitization refers to the cleansing of fomites to remove enough microbes to achieve levels deemed safe forpublic health. For example, commercial dishwashers used in the food service industry typically use very hot water andair for washing and drying; the high temperatures kill most microbes, sanitizing the dishes. Surfaces in hospital roomsare commonly sanitized using a chemical disinfectant to prevent disease transmission between patients. Figure 13.4summarizes common protocols, definitions, applications, and agents used to control microbial growth.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 559Figure 13.4• What is the difference between a disinfectant and an antiseptic?• Which is most effective at removing microbes from a product: sanitization, degerming, or sterilization?Explain.Part 2Roberta’s physician suspected that a bacterial infection was responsible for her sudden-onset high fever,abdominal pain, and bloody urine. Based on these symptoms, the physician diagnosed a urinary tract infection(UTI). A wide variety of bacteria may cause UTIs, which typically occur when bacteria from the lowergastrointestinal tract are introduced to the urinary tract. However, Roberta’s recent gallstone surgery causedthe physician to suspect that she had contracted a nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infection during her surgery.The physician took a urine sample and ordered a urine culture to check for the presence of white bloodcells, red blood cells, and bacteria. The results of this test would help determine the cause of the infection.The physician also prescribed a course of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin, confident that it would clear Roberta’sClinical Focus560 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5infection.• What are some possible ways that bacteria could have been introduced to Roberta’s urinary tractduring her surgery?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Measuring Microbial ControlPhysical and chemical methods of microbial control that kill the targeted microorganism are identified by the suffix-cide (or -cidal). The prefix indicates the type of microbe or infectious agent killed by the treatment method:bactericides kill bacteria, viricides kill or inactivate viruses, and fungicides kill fungi. Other methods do not killorganisms but, instead, stop their growth, making their population static; such methods are identified by the suffix-stat (or -static). For example, bacteriostatic treatments inhibit the growth of bacteria, whereas fungistatic treatmentsinhibit the growth of fungi. Factors that determine whether a particular treatment is -cidal or -static include the typesof microorganisms targeted, the concentration of the chemical used, and the nature of the treatment applied.Although -static treatments do not actually kill infectious agents, they are often less toxic to humans and otheranimals, and may also better preserve the integrity of the item treated. Such treatments are typically sufficient to keepthe microbial population of an item in check. The reduced toxicity of some of these -static chemicals also allows themto be impregnated safely into plastics to prevent the growth of microbes on these surfaces. Such plastics are used inproducts such as toys for children and cutting boards for food preparation. When used to treat an infection, -statictreatments are typically sufficient in an otherwise healthy individual, preventing the pathogen from multiplying, thusallowing the individual’s immune system to clear the infection.The degree of microbial control can be evaluated using a microbial death curve to describe the progress andeffectiveness of a particular protocol. When exposed to a particular microbial control protocol, a fixed percentage ofthe microbes within the population will die. Because the rate of killing remains constant even when the populationsize varies, the percentage killed is more useful information than the absolute number of microbes killed. Deathcurves are often plotted as semilog plots just like microbial growth curves because the reduction in microorganismsis typically logarithmic (Figure 13.5). The amount of time it takes for a specific protocol to produce a one orderof-magnitude decrease in the number of organisms, or the death of 90% of the population, is called the decimalreduction time (DRT) or D-value.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 561Figure 13.5 Microbial death is logarithmic and easily observed using a semilog plot instead of an arithmetic one.The decimal reduction time (D-value) is the time it takes to kill 90% of the population (a 1-log decrease in the totalpopulation) when exposed to a specific microbial control protocol, as indicated by the purple bracket.Several factors contribute to the effectiveness of a disinfecting agent or microbial control protocol. First, asdemonstrated in Figure 13.5, the length of time of exposure is important. Longer exposure times kill moremicrobes. Because microbial death of a population exposed to a specific protocol is logarithmic, it takes longerto kill a high-population load than a low-population load exposed to the same protocol. A shorter treatment time(measured in multiples of the D-value) is needed when starting with a smaller number of organisms. Effectivenessalso depends on the susceptibility of the agent to that disinfecting agent or protocol. The concentration of disinfectingagent or intensity of exposure is also important. For example, higher temperatures and higher concentrations ofdisinfectants kill microbes more quickly and effectively. Conditions that limit contact between the agent and thetargeted cells cells—for example, the presence of bodily fluids, tissue, organic debris (e.g., mud or feces), or biofilmson surfaces—increase the cleaning time or intensity of the microbial control protocol required to reach the desiredlevel of cleanliness. All these factors must be considered when choosing the appropriate protocol to control microbialgrowth in a given situation.• What are two possible reasons for choosing a bacteriostatic treatment over a bactericidal one?• Name at least two factors that can compromise the effectiveness of a disinfecting agent.13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control MicroorganismsLearning Objectives• Understand and compare various physical methods of controlling microbial growth, including heating,refrigeration, freezing, high-pressure treatment, desiccation, lyophilization, irradiation, and filtrationFor thousands of years, humans have used various physical methods of microbial control for food preservation.562 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Common control methods include the application of high temperatures, radiation, filtration, and desiccation (drying),among others. Many of these methods nonspecifically kill cells by disrupting membranes, changing membranepermeability, or damaging proteins and nucleic acids by denaturation, degradation, or chemical modification. Variousphysical methods used for microbial control are described in this section.HeatHeating is one of the most common—and oldest—forms of microbial control. It is used in simple techniques likecooking and canning. Heat can kill microbes by altering their membranes and denaturing proteins. The thermal deathpoint (TDP) of a microorganism is the lowest temperature at which all microbes are killed in a 10-minute exposure.Different microorganisms will respond differently to high temperatures, with some (e.g., endospore-formers such asC. botulinum) being more heat tolerant. A similar parameter, the thermal death time (TDT), is the length of timeneeded to kill all microorganisms in a sample at a given temperature. These parameters are often used to describesterilization procedures that use high heat, such as autoclaving. Boiling is one of the oldest methods of moist-heatcontrol of microbes, and it is typically quite effective at killing vegetative cells and some viruses. However, boilingis less effective at killing endospores; some endospores are able to survive up to 20 hours of boiling. Additionally,boiling may be less effective at higher altitudes, where the boiling point of water is lower and the boiling time neededto kill microbes is therefore longer. For these reasons, boiling is not considered a useful sterilization technique in thelaboratory or clinical setting.Many different heating protocols can be used for sterilization in the laboratory or clinic, and these protocols can bebroken down into two main categories: dry-heat sterilization and moist-heat sterilization. Aseptic technique inthe laboratory typically involves some dry-heat sterilization protocols using direct application of high heat, such assterilizing inoculating loops (Figure 13.6). Incineration at very high temperatures destroys all microorganisms. Dryheat can also be applied for relatively long periods of time (at least 2 hours) at temperatures up to 170 °C by using adry-heat sterilizer, such as an oven. However, moist-heat sterilization is typically the more effective protocol becauseit penetrates cells better than dry heat does.Figure 13.6 (a) Sterilizing a loop, often referred to as “flaming a loop,” is a common component of aseptic techniquein the microbiology laboratory and is used to incinerate any microorganisms on the loop. (b) Alternatively, abactericinerator may be used to reduce aerosolization of microbes and remove the presence of an open flame in thelaboratory. These are examples of dry-heat sterilization by the direct application of high heat capable of incineration.(credit a: modification of work by Anh-Hue Tu; credit b: modification of work by Brian Forster)Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 563AutoclavesAutoclaves rely on moist-heat sterilization. They are used to raise temperatures above the boiling point of waterto sterilize items such as surgical equipment from vegetative cells, viruses, and especially endospores, which areknown to survive boiling temperatures, without damaging the items. Charles Chamberland (1851–1908) designed themodern autoclave in 1879 while working in the laboratory of Louis Pasteur. The autoclave is still considered the mosteffective method of sterilization (Figure 13.7). Outside laboratory and clinical settings, large industrial autoclavescalled retorts allow for moist-heat sterilization on a large scale.In general, the air in the chamber of an autoclave is removed and replaced with increasing amounts of steamtrapped within the enclosed chamber, resulting in increased interior pressure and temperatures above the boilingpoint of water. The two main types of autoclaves differ in the way that air is removed from the chamber. In gravitydisplacement autoclaves, steam is introduced into the chamber from the top or sides. Air, which is heavier than steam,sinks to the bottom of the chamber, where it is forced out through a vent. Complete displacement of air is difficult,especially in larger loads, so longer cycles may be required for such loads. In prevacuum sterilizers, air is removedcompletely using a high-speed vacuum before introducing steam into the chamber. Because air is more completelyeliminated, the steam can more easily penetrate wrapped items. Many autoclaves are capable of both gravity andprevacuum cycles, using the former for the decontamination of waste and sterilization of media and unwrappedglassware, and the latter for sterilization of packaged instruments.Figure 13.7 (a) An autoclave is commonly used for sterilization in the laboratory and in clinical settings. Bydisplacing the air in the chamber with increasing amounts of steam, pressure increases, and temperatures exceeding100 °C can be achieved, allowing for complete sterilization. (b) A researcher programs an autoclave to sterilize asample. (credit a: modification of work by Courtney Harrington; credit b: modification of work by Lackemeyer MG,Kok-Mercado Fd, Wada J, Bollinger L, Kindrachuk J, Wahl-Jensen V, Kuhn JH, Jahrling PB)Standard operating temperatures for autoclaves are 121 °C or, in some cases, 132 °C, typically at a pressure of 15 to20 pounds per square inch (psi). The length of exposure depends on the volume and nature of material being sterilized,but it is typically 20 minutes or more, with larger volumes requiring longer exposure times to ensure sufficient heattransfer to the materials being sterilized. The steam must directly contact the liquids or dry materials being sterilized,so containers are left loosely closed and instruments are loosely wrapped in paper or foil. The key to autoclaving isthat the temperature must be high enough to kill endospores to achieve complete sterilization.Because sterilization is so important to safe medical and laboratory protocols, quality control is essential. Autoclavesmay be equipped with recorders to document the pressures and temperatures achieved during each run. Additionally,internal indicators of various types should be autoclaved along with the materials to be sterilized to ensure thatthe proper sterilization temperature has been reached (Figure 13.8). One common type of indicator is the use ofheat-sensitive autoclave tape, which has white stripes that turn black when the appropriate temperature is achieved564 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5during a successful autoclave run. This type of indicator is relatively inexpensive and can be used during every run.However, autoclave tape provides no indication of length of exposure, so it cannot be used as an indicator of sterility.Another type of indicator, a biological indicator spore test, uses either a strip of paper or a liquid suspension of theendospores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus to determine whether the endospores are killed by the process. Theendospores of the obligate thermophilic bacterium G. stearothermophilus are the gold standard used for this purposebecause of their extreme heat resistance. Biological spore indicators can also be used to test the effectiveness of othersterilization protocols, including ethylene oxide, dry heat, formaldehyde, gamma radiation, and hydrogen peroxideplasma sterilization using either G. stearothermophilus, Bacillus atrophaeus, B. subtilis, or B. pumilus spores. In thecase of validating autoclave function, the endospores are incubated after autoclaving to ensure no viable endosporesremain. Bacterial growth subsequent to endospore germination can be monitored by biological indicator spore teststhat detect acid metabolites or fluorescence produced by enzymes derived from viable G. stearothermophilus. A thirdtype of autoclave indicator is the Diack tube, a glass ampule containing a temperature-sensitive pellet that meltsat the proper sterilization temperature. Spore strips or Diack tubes are used periodically to ensure the autoclave isfunctioning properly.Figure 13.8 The white strips on autoclave tape (left tube) turn dark during a successful autoclave run (right tube).(credit: modification of work by Brian Forster)PasteurizationAlthough complete sterilization is ideal for many medical applications, it is not always practical for other applicationsand may also alter the quality of the product. Boiling and autoclaving are not ideal ways to control microbial growthin many foods because these methods may ruin the consistency and other organoleptic (sensory) qualities of the food.Pasteurization is a form of microbial control for food that uses heat but does not render the food sterile. Traditionalpasteurization kills pathogens and reduces the number of spoilage-causing microbes while maintaining food quality.The process of pasteurization was first developed by Louis Pasteur in the 1860s as a method for preventing thespoilage of beer and wine. Today, pasteurization is most commonly used to kill heat-sensitive pathogens in milk andother food products (e.g., apple juice and honey) (Figure 13.9). However, because pasteurized food products are notsterile, they will eventually spoil.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 565The methods used for milk pasteurization balance the temperature and the length of time of treatment. One method,high-temperature short-time (HTST) pasteurization, exposes milk to a temperature of 72 °C for 15 seconds, whichlowers bacterial numbers while preserving the quality of the milk. An alternative is ultra-high-temperature (UHT)pasteurization, in which the milk is exposed to a temperature of 138 °C for 2 or more seconds. UHT pasteurized milkcan be stored for a long time in sealed containers without being refrigerated; however, the very high temperaturesalter the proteins in the milk, causing slight changes in the taste and smell. Still, this method of pasteurization isadvantageous in regions where access to refrigeration is limited.Figure 13.9 Two different methods of pasteurization, HTST and UHT, are commonly used to kill pathogensassociated with milk spoilage. (credit left: modification of work by Mark Hillary; credit right: modification of work byKerry Ceszyk)• In an autoclave, how are temperatures above boiling achieved?• How would the onset of spoilage compare between HTST-pasteurized and UHT-pasteurized milk?• Why is boiling not used as a sterilization method in a clinical setting?Refrigeration and FreezingJust as high temperatures are effective for controlling microbial growth, exposing microbes to low temperatures canalso be an easy and effective method of microbial control, with the exception of psychrophiles, which prefer coldtemperatures (see Temperature and Microbial Growth). Refrigerators used in home kitchens or in the laboratorymaintain temperatures between 0 °C and 7 °C. This temperature range inhibits microbial metabolism, slowing thegrowth of microorganisms significantly and helping preserve refrigerated products such as foods or medical supplies.Certain types of laboratory cultures can be preserved by refrigeration for later use.Freezing below −2 °C may stop microbial growth and even kill susceptible organisms. According to the USDepartment of Agriculture (USDA), the only safe ways that frozen foods can be thawed are in the refrigerator,immersed in cold water changed every 30 minutes, or in the microwave, keeping the food at temperatures not566 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5conducive for bacterial growth.[3] In addition, halted bacterial growth can restart in thawed foods, so thawed foodsshould be treated like fresh perishables.Bacterial cultures and medical specimens requiring long-term storage or transport are often frozen at ultra-lowtemperatures of −70 °C or lower. These ultra-low temperatures can be achieved by storing specimens on dry ice inan ultra-low freezer or in special liquid nitrogen tanks, which maintain temperatures lower than −196 °C (Figure13.10).Figure 13.10 Cultures and other medical specimens can be stored for long periods at ultra-low temperatures. (a) Anultra-low freezer maintains temperatures at or below −70 °C. (b) Even lower temperatures can be achieved throughfreezing and storage in liquid nitrogen. (credit a: modification of work by “Expert Infantry”/Flickr; credit b: modificationof work by USDA)• Does placing food in a refrigerator kill bacteria on the food?PressureExposure to high pressure kills many microbes. In the food industry, high-pressure processing (also calledpascalization) is used to kill bacteria, yeast, molds, parasites, and viruses in foods while maintaining food qualityand extending shelf life. The application of high pressure between 100 and 800 MPa (sea level atmospheric pressureis about 0.1 MPa) is sufficient to kill vegetative cells by protein denaturation, but endospores may survive thesepressures.[4][5]3. US Department of Agriculture. “Freezing and Food Safety.” 2013. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/topics/food-safety-education/get-answers/food-safety-fact-sheets/safe-food-handling/freezing-and-food-safety/CT_Index. Accessed June 8, 2016.4. C. Ferstl. “High Pressure Processing: Insights on Technology and Regulatory Requirements.” Food for Thought/White Paper. SeriesVolume 10. Livermore, CA: The National Food Lab; July 2013.5. US Food and Drug Administration. “Kinetics of Microbial Inactivation for Alternative Food Processing Technologies: High PressureProcessing.” 2000. http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodScienceResearch/SafePracticesforFoodProcesses/ucm101456.htm. Accessed July 19,2106.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 567In clinical settings, hyperbaric oxygen therapy is sometimes used to treat infections. In this form of therapy, a patientbreathes pure oxygen at a pressure higher than normal atmospheric pressure, typically between 1 and 3 atmospheres(atm). This is achieved by placing the patient in a hyperbaric chamber or by supplying the pressurized oxygen througha breathing tube. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps increase oxygen saturation in tissues that become hypoxic due toinfection and inflammation. This increased oxygen concentration enhances the body’s immune response by increasingthe activities of neutrophils and macrophages, white blood cells that fight infections. Increased oxygen levels alsocontribute to the formation of toxic free radicals that inhibit the growth of oxygen-sensitive or anaerobic bacteria likeas Clostridium perfringens, a common cause of gas gangrene. In C. perfringens infections, hyperbaric oxygen therapycan also reduce secretion of a bacterial toxin that causes tissue destruction. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy also seems toenhance the effectiveness of antibiotic treatments. Unfortunately, some rare risks include oxygen toxicity and effectson delicate tissues, such as the eyes, middle ear, and lungs, which may be damaged by the increased air pressure.High pressure processing is not commonly used for disinfection or sterilization of fomites. Although the applicationof pressure and steam in an autoclave is effective for killing endospores, it is the high temperature achieved, and notthe pressure directly, that results in endospore death.A Streak of Bad PotluckOne Monday in spring 2015, an Ohio woman began to experience blurred, double vision; difficulty swallowing;and drooping eyelids. She was rushed to the emergency department of her local hospital. During theexamination, she began to experience abdominal cramping, nausea, paralysis, dry mouth, weakness of facialmuscles, and difficulty speaking and breathing. Based on these symptoms, the hospital’s incident commandcenter was activated, and Ohio public health officials were notified of a possible case of botulism. Meanwhile,other patients with similar symptoms began showing up at other local hospitals. Because of the suspicionof botulism, antitoxin was shipped overnight from the CDC to these medical facilities, to be administered tothe affected patients. The first patient died of respiratory failure as a result of paralysis, and about half ofthe remaining victims required additional hospitalization following antitoxin administration, with at least tworequiring ventilators for breathing.Public health officials investigated each of the cases and determined that all of the patients had attended thesame church potluck the day before. Moreover, they traced the source of the outbreak to a potato salad madewith home-canned potatoes. More than likely, the potatoes were canned using boiling water, a method thatallows endospores of Clostridium botulinum to survive. C. botulinum produces botulinum toxin, a neurotoxinthat is often deadly once ingested. According to the CDC, the Ohio case was the largest botulism outbreak inthe United States in nearly 40 years.[6]Killing C. botulinum endospores requires a minimum temperature of 116 °C (240 °F), well above the boilingpoint of water. This temperature can only be reached in a pressure canner, which is recommended for homecanning of low-acid foods such as meat, fish, poultry, and vegetables (Figure 13.11). Additionally, the CDCrecommends boiling home-canned foods for about 10 minutes before consumption. Since the botulinum toxinis heat labile (meaning that it is denatured by heat), 10 minutes of boiling will render nonfunctional anybotulinum toxin that the food may contain.Case in Point6. CL McCarty et al. “Large Outbreak of Botulism Associated with a Church Potluck Meal-Ohio, 2015.” Morbidity and Mortality WeeklyReport 64, no. 29 (2015):802–803.568 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 13.11 (a) Clostridium botulinum is the causative agent of botulism. (b) A pressure canner isrecommended for home canning because endospores of C. botulinum can survive temperatures above theboiling point of water. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:modification of work by National Center for Home Food Preservation)To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22cdccanathome) about proper homecanningtechniques, visit the CDC’s website.DesiccationDrying, also known as desiccation or dehydration, is a method that has been used for millennia to preserve foodssuch as raisins, prunes, and jerky. It works because all cells, including microbes, require water for their metabolismand survival. Although drying controls microbial growth, it might not kill all microbes or their endospores, whichmay start to regrow when conditions are more favorable and water content is restored.In some cases, foods are dried in the sun, relying on evaporation to achieve desiccation. Freeze-drying, orlyophilization, is another method of dessication in which an item is rapidly frozen (“snap-frozen”) and placedunder vacuum so that water is lost by sublimation. Lyophilization combines both exposure to cold temperatures anddesiccation, making it quite effective for controlling microbial growth. In addition, lyophilization causes less damageto an item than conventional desiccation and better preserves the item’s original qualities. Lyophilized items maybe stored at room temperature if packaged appropriately to prevent moisture acquisition. Lyophilization is used forpreservation in the food industry and is also used in the laboratory for the long-term storage and transportation ofmicrobial cultures.The water content of foods and materials, called the water activity, can be lowered without physical drying by theLink to LearningChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 569addition of solutes such as salts or sugars. At very high concentrations of salts or sugars, the amount of availablewater in microbial cells is reduced dramatically because water will be drawn from an area of low solute concentration(inside the cell) to an area of high solute concentration (outside the cell) (Figure 13.12). Many microorganismsdo not survive these conditions of high osmotic pressure. Honey, for example, is 80% sucrose, an environment inwhich very few microorganisms are capable of growing, thereby eliminating the need for refrigeration. Salted meatsand fish, like ham and cod, respectively, were critically important foods before the age of refrigeration. Fruits werepreserved by adding sugar, making jams and jellies. However, certain microbes, such as molds and yeasts, tend to bemore tolerant of desiccation and high osmotic pressures, and, thus, may still contaminate these types of foods.Figure 13.12 (a) The addition of a solute creates a hypertonic environment, drawing water out of cells. (b) Somefoods can be dried directly, like raisins and jerky. Other foods are dried with the addition of salt, as in the case ofsalted fish, or sugar, as in the case of jam. (credit a: modification of work by “Bruce Blaus”/Wikimedia Commons;credit raisins: modification of work by Christian Schnettelker; credit jerky: modification of work by Larry Jacobsen;credit salted fish: modification of work by “The Photographer”/Wikimedia Commons; credit jam: modification of workby Kim Becker)• How does the addition of salt or sugar to food affect its water activity?RadiationRadiation in various forms, from high-energy radiation to sunlight, can be used to kill microbes or inhibit theirgrowth. Ionizing radiation includes X-rays, gamma rays, and high-energy electron beams. Ionizing radiation isstrong enough to pass into the cell, where it alters molecular structures and damages cell components. For example,ionizing radiation introduces double-strand breaks in DNA molecules. This may directly cause DNA mutationsto occur, or mutations may be introduced when the cell attempts to repair the DNA damage. As these mutationsaccumulate, they eventually lead to cell death.Both X-rays and gamma rays easily penetrate paper and plastic and can therefore be used to sterilize many packagedmaterials. In the laboratory, ionizing radiation is commonly used to sterilize materials that cannot be autoclaved, suchas plastic Petri dishes and disposable plastic inoculating loops. For clinical use, ionizing radiation is used to sterilizegloves, intravenous tubing, and other latex and plastic items used for patient care. Ionizing radiation is also used forthe sterilization of other types of delicate, heat-sensitive materials used clinically, including tissues for transplantation,pharmaceutical drugs, and medical equipment.In Europe, gamma irradiation for food preservation is widely used, although it has been slow to catch on in the UnitedStates (see the Micro Connections box on this topic). Packaged dried spices are also often gamma-irradiated.570 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Because of their ability to penetrate paper, plastic, thin sheets of wood and metal, and tissue, great care must be takenwhen using X-rays and gamma irradiation. These types of ionizing irradiation cannot penetrate thick layers of iron orlead, so these metals are commonly used to protect humans who may be potentially exposed.Another type of radiation, nonionizing radiation, is commonly used for disinfection and uses less energy thanionizing radiation. It does not penetrate cells or packaging. Ultraviolet (UV) light is one example; it causes thyminedimers to form between adjacent thymines within a single strand of DNA (Figure 13.13). When DNA polymeraseencounters the thymine dimer, it does not always incorporate the appropriate complementary nucleotides (twoadenines), and this leads to formation of mutations that can ultimately kill microorganisms.UV light can be used effectively by both consumers and laboratory personnel to control microbial growth. UVlamps are now commonly incorporated into water purification systems for use in homes. In addition, small portableUV lights are commonly used by campers to purify water from natural environments before drinking. Germicidallamps are also used in surgical suites, biological safety cabinets, and transfer hoods, typically emitting UV light at awavelength of 260 nm. Because UV light does not penetrate surfaces and will not pass through plastics or glass, cellsmust be exposed directly to the light source.Sunlight has a very broad spectrum that includes UV and visible light. In some cases, sunlight can be effective againstcertain bacteria because of both the formation of thymine dimers by UV light and by the production of reactiveoxygen products induced in low amounts by exposure to visible light.Figure 13.13 (a) UV radiation causes the formation of thymine dimers in DNA, leading to lethal mutations in theexposed microbes. (b) Germicidal lamps that emit UV light are commonly used in the laboratory to disinfectequipment.• What are two advantages of ionizing radiation as a sterilization method?• How does the effectiveness of ionizing radiation compare with that of nonionizing radiation?Irradiated Food: Would You Eat That?Of all the ways to prevent food spoilage and foodborne illness, gamma irradiation may be the mostMicro ConnectionsChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 571unappetizing. Although gamma irradiation is a proven method of eliminating potentially harmful microbes fromfood, the public has yet to buy in. Most of their concerns, however, stem from misinformation and a poorunderstanding of the basic principles of radiation.The most common method of irradiation is to expose food to cobalt-60 or cesium-137 by passing it through aradiation chamber on a conveyor belt. The food does not directly contact the radioactive material and does notbecome radioactive itself. Thus, there is no risk for exposure to radioactive material through eating gammairradiatedfoods. Additionally, irradiated foods are not significantly altered in terms of nutritional quality, asidefrom the loss of certain vitamins, which is also exacerbated by extended storage. Alterations in taste or smellmay occur in irradiated foods with high fat content, such as fatty meats and dairy products, but this effect canbe minimized by using lower doses of radiation at colder temperatures.In the United States, the CDC, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Food and Drug Administration(FDA) have deemed irradiation safe and effective for various types of meats, poultry, shellfish, fresh fruits andvegetables, eggs with shells, and spices and seasonings. Gamma irradiation of foods has also been approvedfor use in many other countries, including France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Israel, Russia, China, Thailand,Belgium, Australia, and South Africa. To help ameliorate consumer concern and assist with education efforts,irradiated foods are now clearly labeled and marked with the international irradiation symbol, called the “radura”(Figure 13.14). Consumer acceptance seems to be rising, as indicated by several recent studies.[7]Figure 13.14 (a) Foods are exposed to gamma radiation by passage on a conveyor belt through a radiationchamber. (b) Gamma-irradiated foods must be clearly labeled and display the irradiation symbol, known asthe “radura.” (credit a, b: modification of work by U.S. Department of Agriculture)SonicationThe use of high-frequency ultrasound waves to disrupt cell structures is called sonication. Application of ultrasoundwaves causes rapid changes in pressure within the intracellular liquid; this leads to cavitation, the formation ofbubbles inside the cell, which can disrupt cell structures and eventually cause the cell to lyse or collapse. Sonication isuseful in the laboratory for efficiently lysing cells to release their contents for further research; outside the laboratory,sonication is used for cleaning surgical instruments, lenses, and a variety of other objects such as coins, tools, andmusical instruments.FiltrationFiltration is a method of physically separating microbes from samples. Air is commonly filtered through highefficiencyparticulate air (HEPA) filters (Figure 13.15). HEPA filters have effective pore sizes of 0.3 μm, small7. AM Johnson et al. “Consumer Acceptance of Electron-Beam Irradiated Ready-to-Eat Poultry Meats.” Food Processing Preservation, 28no. 4 (2004):302–319.572 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5enough to capture bacterial cells, endospores, and many viruses, as air passes through these filters, nearly sterilizingthe air on the other side of the filter. HEPA filters have a variety of applications and are used widely in clinicalsettings, in cars and airplanes, and even in the home. For example, they may be found in vacuum cleaners, heatingand air-conditioning systems, and air purifiers.Figure 13.15 (a) HEPA filters like this one remove microbes, endospores, and viruses as air flows through them. (b)A schematic of a HEPA filter. (credit a: modification of work by CSIRO; credit b: modification of work by“LadyofHats”/Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Biological Safety CabinetsBiological safety cabinets are a good example of the use of HEPA filters. HEPA filters in biological safety cabinets(BSCs) are used to remove particulates in the air either entering the cabinet (air intake), leaving the cabinet(air exhaust), or treating both the intake and exhaust. Use of an air-intake HEPA filter prevents environmentalcontaminants from entering the BSC, creating a clean area for handling biological materials. Use of an air-exhaustHEPA filter prevents laboratory pathogens from contaminating the laboratory, thus maintaining a safe work area forlaboratory personnel.There are three classes of BSCs: I, II, and III. Each class is designed to provide a different level of protection forlaboratory personnel and the environment; BSC II and III are also designed to protect the materials or devices in thecabinet. Table 13.1 summarizes the level of safety provided by each class of BSC for each BSL.Biological Risks and BSCsBiological RiskAssessedBSC Class Protection ofPersonnelProtection ofEnvironmentProtection ofProductBSL-1, BSL-2,BSL-3I Yes Yes NoBSL-1, BSL-2,BSL-3II Yes Yes YesBSL-4 III; II when used in suitroom with suitYes Yes YesTable 13.1Class I BSCs protect laboratory workers and the environment from a low to moderate risk for exposure to biologicalChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 573agents used in the laboratory. Air is drawn into the cabinet and then filtered before exiting through the building’sexhaust system. Class II BSCs use directional air flow and partial barrier systems to contain infectious agents. ClassIII BSCs are designed for working with highly infectious agents like those used in BSL-4 laboratories. They aregas tight, and materials entering or exiting the cabinet must be passed through a double-door system, allowing theintervening space to be decontaminated between uses. All air is passed through one or two HEPA filters and anair incineration system before being exhausted directly to the outdoors (not through the building’s exhaust system).Personnel can manipulate materials inside the Class III cabinet by using long rubber gloves sealed to the cabinet.This video (https://openstax.org/l/22BSCsdesvideo) shows how BSCs aredesigned and explains how they protect personnel, the environment, and theproduct.Filtration in HospitalsHEPA filters are also commonly used in hospitals and surgical suites to prevent contamination and the spread ofairborne microbes through ventilation systems. HEPA filtration systems may be designed for entire buildings or forindividual rooms. For example, burn units, operating rooms, or isolation units may require special HEPA-filtrationsystems to remove opportunistic pathogens from the environment because patients in these rooms are particularlyvulnerable to infection.Membrane FiltersFiltration can also be used to remove microbes from liquid samples using membrane filtration. Membrane filters forliquids function similarly to HEPA filters for air. Typically, membrane filters that are used to remove bacteria have aneffective pore size of 0.2 μm, smaller than the average size of a bacterium (1 μm), but filters with smaller pore sizesare available for more specific needs. Membrane filtration is useful for removing bacteria from various types of heatsensitivesolutions used in the laboratory, such as antibiotic solutions and vitamin solutions. Large volumes of culturemedia may also be filter sterilized rather than autoclaved to protect heat-sensitive components. Often when filteringsmall volumes, syringe filters are used, but vacuum filters are typically used for filtering larger volumes (Figure13.16).Link to Learning574 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 13.16 Membrane filters come in a variety of sizes, depending on the volume of solution being filtered. (a)Larger volumes are filtered in units like these. The solution is drawn through the filter by connecting the unit to avacuum. (b) Smaller volumes are often filtered using syringe filters, which are units that fit on the end of a syringe. Inthis case, the solution is pushed through by depressing the syringe’s plunger. (credit a, b: modification of work byBrian Forster)• Would membrane filtration with a 0.2-μm filter likely remove viruses from a solution? Explain.• Name at least two common uses of HEPA filtration in clinical or laboratory settings.Figure 13.17 and Figure 13.18 summarize the physical methods of control discussed in this section.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 575Figure 13.17576 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 13.1813.3 Using Chemicals to Control MicroorganismsLearning Objectives• Understand and compare various chemicals used to control microbial growth, including their uses, advantagesand disadvantages, chemical structure, and mode of actionIn addition to physical methods of microbial control, chemicals are also used to control microbial growth. A widevariety of chemicals can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics. When choosing which to use, it is important toconsider the type of microbe targeted; how clean the item needs to be; the disinfectant’s effect on the item’s integrity;its safety to animals, humans, and the environment; its expense; and its ease of use. This section describes the varietyof chemicals used as disinfectants and antiseptics, including their mechanisms of action and common uses.PhenolicsIn the 1800s, scientists began experimenting with a variety of chemicals for disinfection. In the 1860s, British surgeonJoseph Lister (1827–1912) began using carbolic acid, known as phenol, as a disinfectant for the treatment of surgicalwounds (see Foundations of Modern Cell Theory). In 1879, Lister’s work inspired the American chemist JosephLawrence (1836–1909) to develop Listerine, an alcohol-based mixture of several related compounds that is still usedtoday as an oral antiseptic. Today, carbolic acid is no longer used as a surgical disinfectant because it is a skin irritant,but the chemical compounds found in antiseptic mouthwashes and throat lozenges are called phenolics.Chemically, phenol consists of a benzene ring with an –OH group, and phenolics are compounds that have this groupas part of their chemical structure (Figure 13.19). Phenolics such as thymol and eucalyptol occur naturally in plants.Other phenolics can be derived from creosote, a component of coal tar. Phenolics tend to be stable, persistent onsurfaces, and less toxic than phenol. They inhibit microbial growth by denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 577Figure 13.19 Phenol and phenolic compounds have been used to control microbial growth. (a) Chemical structure ofphenol, also known as carbolic acid. (b) o-Phenylphenol, a type of phenolic, has been used as a disinfectant as wellas to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvested citrus fruits. (c) Hexachlorophene, another phenol, known as abisphenol (two rings), is the active ingredient in pHisoHex.Since Lister’s time, several phenolic compounds have been used to control microbial growth. Phenolics like cresols(methylated phenols) and o-phenylphenol were active ingredients in various formulations of Lysol since its inventionin 1889. o-Phenylphenol was also commonly used in agriculture to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvestedcrops, especially citrus fruits, but its use in the United States is now far more limited. The bisphenol hexachlorophene,a disinfectant, is the active ingredient in pHisoHex, a topical cleansing detergent widely used for handwashingin hospital settings. pHisoHex is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria, including those causingstaphylococcal and streptococcal skin infections. pHisoHex was formerly used for bathing infants, but this practicehas been discontinued because it has been shown that exposure to hexachlorophene can lead to neurological problems.Triclosan is another bisphenol compound that has seen widespread application in antibacterial products over thelast several decades. Initially used in toothpastes, triclosan is now commonly used in hand soaps and is frequentlyimpregnated into a wide variety of other products, including cutting boards, knives, shower curtains, clothing, andconcrete, to make them antimicrobial. It is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria on the skin, as well ascertain gram-negative bacteria and yeasts.[8]Triclosan: Antibacterial Overkill?Hand soaps and other cleaning products are often marketed as “antibacterial,” suggesting that they provide alevel of cleanliness superior to that of conventional soaps and cleansers. But are the antibacterial ingredientsin these products really safe and effective?About 75% of antibacterial liquid hand soaps and 30% of bar soaps contain the chemical triclosan, a phenolic,(Figure 13.20).[9] Triclosan blocks an enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid-biosynthesis pathway that is not foundin the comparable human pathway. Although the use of triclosan in the home increased dramatically duringthe 1990s, more than 40 years of research by the FDA have turned up no conclusive evidence that washingwith triclosan-containing products provides increased health benefits compared with washing with traditionalsoap. Although some studies indicate that fewer bacteria may remain on a person’s hands after washing withtriclosan-based soap, compared with traditional soap, no evidence points to any reduction in the transmissionof bacteria that cause respiratory and gastrointestinal illness. In short, soaps with triclosan may remove or killa few more germs but not enough to reduce the spread of disease.Perhaps more disturbing, some clear risks associated with triclosan-based soaps have come to light. Thewidespread use of triclosan has led to an increase in triclosan-resistant bacterial strains, including thoseof clinical importance, such as Salmonella enterica; this resistance may render triclosan useless as anantibacterial in the long run.[10][11] Bacteria can easily gain resistance to triclosan through a change to a singleMicro Connections8. US Food and Drug Administration. “Triclosan: What Consumers Should Know.” 2015. http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm205999.htm. Accessed June 9, 2016.578 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5gene encoding the targeted enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid-synthesis pathway. Other disinfectants with aless specific mode of action are much less prone to engendering resistance because it would take much morethan a single genetic change.Use of triclosan over the last several decades has also led to a buildup of the chemical in the environment.Triclosan in hand soap is directly introduced into wastewater and sewage systems as a result of thehandwashing process. There, its antibacterial properties can inhibit or kill bacteria responsible for thedecomposition of sewage, causing septic systems to clog and back up. Eventually, triclosan in wastewaterfinds its way into surface waters, streams, lakes, sediments, and soils, disrupting natural populations ofbacteria that carry out important environmental functions, such as inhibiting algae. Triclosan also finds its wayinto the bodies of amphibians and fish, where it can act as an endocrine disruptor. Detectable levels of triclosanhave also been found in various human bodily fluids, including breast milk, plasma, and urine.[12] In fact, astudy conducted by the CDC found detectable levels of triclosan in the urine of 75% of 2,517 people tested in2003–2004.[13] This finding is even more troubling given the evidence that triclosan may affect immune functionin humans.[14]In December 2013, the FDA gave soap manufacturers until 2016 to prove that antibacterial soaps providea significant benefit over traditional soaps; if unable to do so, manufacturers will be forced to remove theseproducts from the market.Figure 13.20 Triclosan is a common ingredient in antibacterial soaps despite evidence that it posesenvironmental and health risks and offers no significant health benefit compared to conventional soaps.(credit b, c: modification of work by FDA)9. J. Stromberg. “Five Reasons Why You Should Probably Stop Using Antibacterial Soap.” Smithsonian.com January 3, 2014.http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/five-reasons-why-you-should-probably-stop-using-antibacterial-soap-180948078/?no-ist.Accessed June 9, 2016.10. SP Yazdankhah et al. “Triclosan and Antimicrobial Resistance in Bacteria: An Overview.” Microbial Drug Resistance 12 no. 2(2006):83–90.11. L. Birošová, M. Mikulášová. “Development of Triclosan and Antibiotic Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.”Journal of Medical Microbiology 58 no. 4 (2009):436–441.12. AB Dann, A. Hontela. “Triclosan: Environmental Exposure, Toxicity and Mechanisms of Action.” Journal of Applied Toxicology 31 no.4 (2011):285–311.13. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Triclosan Fact Sheet.” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/Triclosan_FactSheet.html. Accessed June 9, 2016.14. EM Clayton et al. “The Impact of Bisphenol A and Triclosan on Immune Parameters in the US Population, NHANES 2003-2006.”Environmental Health Perspectives 119 no. 3 (2011):390.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 579• Why is triclosan more like an antibiotic than a traditional disinfectant?Heavy MetalsSome of the first chemical disinfectants and antiseptics to be used were heavy metals. Heavy metals kill microbesby binding to proteins, thus inhibiting enzymatic activity (Figure 13.21). Heavy metals are oligodynamic, meaningthat very small concentrations show significant antimicrobial activity. Ions of heavy metals bind to sulfur-containingamino acids strongly and bioaccumulate within cells, allowing these metals to reach high localized concentrations.This causes proteins to denature.Heavy metals are not selectively toxic to microbial cells. They may bioaccumulate in human or animal cells, aswell, and excessive concentrations can have toxic effects on humans. If too much silver accumulates in the body, forexample, it can result in a condition called argyria, in which the skin turns irreversibly blue-gray. One way to reducethe potential toxicity of heavy metals is by carefully controlling the duration of exposure and concentration of theheavy metal.Figure 13.21 Heavy metals denature proteins, impairing cell function and, thus, giving them strong antimicrobialproperties. (a) Copper in fixtures like this door handle kills microbes that otherwise might accumulate on frequentlytouched surfaces. (b) Eating utensils contain small amounts of silver to inhibit microbial growth. (c) Copper commonlylines incubators to minimize contamination of cell cultures stored inside. (d) Antiseptic mouthwashes commonlycontain zinc chloride. (e) This patient is suffering from argyria, an irreversible condition caused by bioaccumulation ofsilver in the body. (credit b: modification of work by “Shoshanah”/Flickr; credit e: modification of work by Herbert L.Fred and Hendrik A. van Dijk)MercuryMercury is an example of a heavy metal that has been used for many years to control microbial growth. It was usedfor many centuries to treat syphilis. Mercury compounds like mercuric chloride are mainly bacteriostatic and havea very broad spectrum of activity. Various forms of mercury bind to sulfur-containing amino acids within proteins,inhibiting their functions.In recent decades, the use of such compounds has diminished because of mercury’s toxicity. It is toxic to the centralnervous, digestive, and renal systems at high concentrations, and has negative environmental effects, includingbioaccumulation in fish. Topical antiseptics such as mercurochrome, which contains mercury in low concentrations,and merthiolate, a tincture (a solution of mercury dissolved in alcohol) were once commonly used. However, becauseof concerns about using mercury compounds, these antiseptics are no longer sold in the United States.580 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5SilverSilver has long been used as an antiseptic. In ancient times, drinking water was stored in silver jugs.[15] Silvadenecream is commonly used to treat topical wounds and is particularly helpful in preventing infection in burn wounds.Silver nitrate drops were once routinely applied to the eyes of newborns to protect against ophthalmia neonatorum,eye infections that can occur due to exposure to pathogens in the birth canal, but antibiotic creams are morenow commonly used. Silver is often combined with antibiotics, making the antibiotics thousands of times moreeffective.[16] Silver is also commonly incorporated into catheters and bandages, rendering them antimicrobial;however, there is evidence that heavy metals may also enhance selection for antibiotic resistance.[17]Copper, Nickel, and ZincSeveral other heavy metals also exhibit antimicrobial activity. Copper sulfate is a common algicide used to controlalgal growth in swimming pools and fish tanks. The use of metallic copper to minimize microbial growth is alsobecoming more widespread. Copper linings in incubators help reduce contamination of cell cultures. The use ofcopper pots for water storage in underdeveloped countries is being investigated as a way to combat diarrheal diseases.Copper coatings are also becoming popular for frequently handled objects such as doorknobs, cabinet hardware, andother fixtures in health-care facilities in an attempt to reduce the spread of microbes.Nickel and zinc coatings are now being used in a similar way. Other forms of zinc, including zinc chloride and zincoxide, are also used commercially. Zinc chloride is quite safe for humans and is commonly found in mouthwashes,substantially increasing their length of effectiveness. Zinc oxide is found in a variety of products, including topicalantiseptic creams such as calamine lotion, diaper ointments, baby powder, and dandruff shampoos.• Why are many heavy metals both antimicrobial and toxic to humans?HalogensOther chemicals commonly used for disinfection are the halogens iodine, chlorine, and fluorine. Iodine works byoxidizing cellular components, including sulfur-containing amino acids, nucleotides, and fatty acids, and destabilizingthe macromolecules that contain these molecules. It is often used as a topical tincture, but it may cause staining or skinirritation. An iodophor is a compound of iodine complexed with an organic molecule, thereby increasing iodine’sstability and, in turn, its efficacy. One common iodophor is povidone-iodine, which includes a wetting agent thatreleases iodine relatively slowly. Betadine is a brand of povidone-iodine commonly used as a hand scrub by medicalpersonnel before surgery and for topical antisepsis of a patient’s skin before incision (Figure 13.22).15. N. Silvestry-Rodriguez et al. “Silver as a Disinfectant.” In Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, pp. 23-45. Editedby GW Ware and DM Whitacre. New York: Springer, 2007.16. B. Owens. “Silver Makes Antibiotics Thousands of Times More Effective.” Nature June 19 2013. http://www.nature.com/news/silvermakes-antibiotics-thousands-of-times-more-effective-1.1323217. C. Seiler, TU Berendonk. “Heavy Metal Driven Co-Selection of Antibiotic Resistance in Soil and Water Bodies Impacted byAgriculture and Aquaculture.” Frontiers in Microbiology 3 (2012):399.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 581Figure 13.22 (a) Betadine is a solution of the iodophor povidone-iodine. (b) It is commonly used as a topicalantiseptic on a patient’s skin before incision during surgery. (credit b: modification of work by Andrew Ratto)Chlorine is another halogen commonly used for disinfection. When chlorine gas is mixed with water, it produces astrong oxidant called hypochlorous acid, which is uncharged and enters cells easily. Chlorine gas is commonly used inmunicipal drinking water and wastewater treatment plants, with the resulting hypochlorous acid producing the actualantimicrobial effect. Those working at water treatment facilities need to take great care to minimize personal exposureto chlorine gas. Sodium hypochlorite is the chemical component of common household bleach, and it is also usedfor a wide variety of disinfecting purposes. Hypochlorite salts, including sodium and calcium hypochlorites, are usedto disinfect swimming pools. Chlorine gas, sodium hypochlorite, and calcium hypochlorite are also commonly useddisinfectants in the food processing and restaurant industries to reduce the spread of foodborne diseases. Workers inthese industries also need to take care to use these products correctly to ensure their own safety as well as the safety ofconsumers. A recent joint statement published by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nationsand WHO indicated that none of the many beneficial uses of chlorine products in food processing to reduce the spreadof foodborne illness posed risks to consumers.[18]Another class of chlorinated compounds called chloramines are widely used as disinfectants. Chloramines arerelatively stable, releasing chlorine over long periods time. Chloramines are derivatives of ammonia by substitutionof one, two, or all three hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms (Figure 13.23).Figure 13.23 Monochloroamine, one of the chloramines, is derived from ammonia by the replacement of onehydrogen atom with a chlorine atom.Chloramines and other cholorine compounds may be used for disinfection of drinking water, and chloramine tabletsare frequently used by the military for this purpose. After a natural disaster or other event that compromises the publicwater supply, the CDC recommends disinfecting tap water by adding small amounts of regular household bleach.Recent research suggests that sodium dichloroisocyanurate (NaDCC) may also be a good alternative for drinkingwater disinfection. Currently, NaDCC tablets are available for general use and for use by the military, campers, orthose with emergency needs; for these uses, NaDCC is preferable to chloramine tablets. Chlorine dioxide, a gaseousagent used for fumigation and sterilization of enclosed areas, is also commonly used for the disinfection of water.Although chlorinated compounds are relatively effective disinfectants, they have their disadvantages. Some mayirritate the skin, nose, or eyes of some individuals, and they may not completely eliminate certain hardy organisms18. World Health Organization. “Benefits and Risks of the Use of Chlorine-Containing Disinfectants in Food Production and FoodProcessing: Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meeting.” Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2009.582 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5from contaminated drinking water. The protozoan parasite Cryptosporidium, for example, has a protective outershell that makes it resistant to chlorinated disinfectants. Thus, boiling of drinking water in emergency situations isrecommended when possible.The halogen fluorine is also known to have antimicrobial properties that contribute to the prevention of dental caries(cavities).[19] Fluoride is the main active ingredient of toothpaste and is also commonly added to tap water to helpcommunities maintain oral health. Chemically, fluoride can become incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of toothenamel, making it more resistant to corrosive acids produced by the fermentation of oral microbes. Fluoride alsoenhances the uptake of calcium and phosphate ions in tooth enamel, promoting remineralization. In addition tostrengthening enamel, fluoride also seems to be bacteriostatic. It accumulates in plaque-forming bacteria, interferingwith their metabolism and reducing their production of the acids that contribute to tooth decay.• What is a benefit of a chloramine over hypochlorite for disinfecting?AlcoholsAlcohols make up another group of chemicals commonly used as disinfectants and antiseptics. They work by rapidlydenaturing proteins, which inhibits cell metabolism, and by disrupting membranes, which leads to cell lysis. Oncedenatured, the proteins may potentially refold if enough water is present in the solution. Alcohols are typically usedat concentrations of about 70% aqueous solution and, in fact, work better in aqueous solutions than 100% alcoholsolutions. This is because alcohols coagulate proteins. In higher alcohol concentrations, rapid coagulation of surfaceproteins prevents effective penetration of cells. The most commonly used alcohols for disinfection are ethyl alcohol(ethanol) and isopropyl alcohol (isopropanol, rubbing alcohol) (Figure 13.24).Alcohols tend to be bactericidal and fungicidal, but may also be viricidal for enveloped viruses only. Althoughalcohols are not sporicidal, they do inhibit the processes of sporulation and germination. Alcohols are volatile anddry quickly, but they may also cause skin irritation because they dehydrate the skin at the site of application. Onecommon clinical use of alcohols is swabbing the skin for degerming before needle injection. Alcohols also are theactive ingredients in instant hand sanitizers, which have gained popularity in recent years. The alcohol in thesehand sanitizers works both by denaturing proteins and by disrupting the microbial cell membrane, but will not workeffectively in the presence of visible dirt.Last, alcohols are used to make tinctures with other antiseptics, such as the iodine tinctures discussed previously inthis chapter. All in all, alcohols are inexpensive and quite effective for the disinfection of a broad range of vegetativemicrobes. However, one disadvantage of alcohols is their high volatility, limiting their effectiveness to immediatelyafter application.19. RE Marquis. “Antimicrobial Actions of Fluoride for Oral Bacteria.” Canadian Journal of Microbiology 41 no. 11 (1995):955–964.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 583Figure 13.24 (a) Ethyl alcohol, the intoxicating ingredient found in alcoholic drinks, is also used commonly as adisinfectant. (b) Isopropyl alcohol, also called rubbing alcohol, has a related molecular structure and is anothercommonly used disinfectant. (credit a photo: modification of work by D Coetzee; credit b photo: modification of workby Craig Spurrier)• Name at least three advantages of alcohols as disinfectants.• Describe several specific applications of alcohols used in disinfectant products.SurfactantsSurface-active agents, or surfactants, are a group of chemical compounds that lower the surface tension of water.Surfactants are the major ingredients in soaps and detergents. Soaps are salts of long-chain fatty acids and have bothpolar and nonpolar regions, allowing them to interact with polar and nonpolar regions in other molecules (Figure13.25). They can interact with nonpolar oils and grease to create emulsions in water, loosening and lifting awaydirt and microbes from surfaces and skin. Soaps do not kill or inhibit microbial growth and so are not consideredantiseptics or disinfectants. However, proper use of soaps mechanically carries away microorganisms, effectivelydegerming a surface. Some soaps contain added bacteriostatic agents such as triclocarban or cloflucarban, compoundsstructurally related to triclosan, that introduce antiseptic or disinfectant properties to the soaps.Figure 13.25 Soaps are the salts (sodium salt in the illustration) of fatty acids and have the ability to emulsify lipids,fats, and oils by interacting with water through their hydrophilic heads and with the lipid at their hydrophobic tails.Soaps, however, often form films that are difficult to rinse away, especially in hard water, which contains highconcentrations of calcium and magnesium mineral salts. Detergents contain synthetic surfactant molecules with bothpolar and nonpolar regions that have strong cleansing activity but are more soluble, even in hard water, and, therefore,leave behind no soapy deposits. Anionic detergents, such as those used for laundry, have a negatively charged anionat one end attached to a long hydrophobic chain, whereas cationic detergents have a positively charged cation instead.584 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Cationic detergents include an important class of disinfectants and antiseptics called the quaternary ammoniumsalts (quats), named for the characteristic quaternary nitrogen atom that confers the positive charge (Figure 13.26).Overall, quats have properties similar to phospholipids, having hydrophilic and hydrophobic ends. As such, quatshave the ability to insert into the bacterial phospholipid bilayer and disrupt membrane integrity. The cationiccharge of quats appears to confer their antimicrobial properties, which are diminished when neutralized. Quats haveseveral useful properties. They are stable, nontoxic, inexpensive, colorless, odorless, and tasteless. They tend to bebactericidal by disrupting membranes. They are also active against fungi, protozoans, and enveloped viruses, butendospores are unaffected. In clinical settings, they may be used as antiseptics or to disinfect surfaces. Mixtures ofquats are also commonly found in household cleaners and disinfectants, including many current formulations of Lysolbrand products, which contain benzalkonium chlorides as the active ingredients. Benzalkonium chlorides, along withthe quat cetylpyrimidine chloride, are also found in products such as skin antiseptics, oral rinses, and mouthwashes.Figure 13.26 (a) Two common quats are benzylalkonium chloride and cetylpyrimidine chloride. Note thehydrophobic nonpolar carbon chain at one end and the nitrogen-containing cationic component at the other end. (b)Quats are able to infiltrate the phospholipid plasma membranes of bacterial cells and disrupt their integrity, leading todeath of the cell.• Why are soaps not considered disinfectants?Handwashing the Right WayHandwashing is critical for public health and should be emphasized in a clinical setting. For the general public,the CDC recommends handwashing before, during, and after food handling; before eating; before and afterinteracting with someone who is ill; before and after treating a wound; after using the toilet or changing diapers;after coughing, sneezing, or blowing the nose; after handling garbage; and after interacting with an animal, itsMicro ConnectionsChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 585feed, or its waste. Figure 13.27 illustrates the five steps of proper handwashing recommended by the CDC.Handwashing is even more important for health-care workers, who should wash their hands thoroughlybetween every patient contact, after the removal of gloves, after contact with bodily fluids and potentiallyinfectious fomites, and before and after assisting a surgeon with invasive procedures. Even with the use ofproper surgical attire, including gloves, scrubbing for surgery is more involved than routine handwashing. Thegoal of surgical scrubbing is to reduce the normal microbiota on the skin’s surface to prevent the introductionof these microbes into a patient’s surgical wounds.There is no single widely accepted protocol for surgical scrubbing. Protocols for length of time spent scrubbingmay depend on the antimicrobial used; health-care workers should always check the manufacturer’srecommendations. According to the Association of Surgical Technologists (AST), surgical scrubs may beperformed with or without the use of brushes (Figure 13.27).Figure 13.27 (a) The CDC recommends five steps as part of typical handwashing for the general public. (b)Surgical scrubbing is more extensive, requiring scrubbing starting from the fingertips, extending to the handsand forearms, and then up beyond the elbows, as shown here. (credit a: modification of work by World HealthOrganization)586 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22CDChandwash) about properhandwashing, visit the CDC’s website.BisbiguanidesBisbiguanides were first synthesized in the 20th century and are cationic (positively charged) molecules knownfor their antiseptic properties (Figure 13.28). One important bisbiguanide antiseptic is chlorhexidine. It hasbroad-spectrum activity against yeasts, gram-positive bacteria, and gram-negative bacteria, with the exception ofPseudomonas aeruginosa, which may develop resistance on repeated exposure.[20] Chlorhexidine disrupts cellmembranes and is bacteriostatic at lower concentrations or bactericidal at higher concentrations, in which it actuallycauses the cells’ cytoplasmic contents to congeal. It also has activity against enveloped viruses. However,chlorhexidine is poorly effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and nonenveloped viruses, and it is notsporicidal. Chlorhexidine is typically used in the clinical setting as a surgical scrub and for other handwashing needsfor medical personnel, as well as for topical antisepsis for patients before surgery or needle injection. It is morepersistent than iodophors, providing long-lasting antimicrobial activity. Chlorhexidine solutions may also be usedas oral rinses after oral procedures or to treat gingivitis. Another bisbiguanide, alexidine, is gaining popularity as asurgical scrub and an oral rinse because it acts faster than chlorhexidine.Figure 13.28 The bisbiguanides chlorhexadine and alexidine are cationic antiseptic compounds commonly used assurgical scrubs.• What two effects does chlorhexidine have on bacterial cells?Alkylating AgentsThe alkylating agents are a group of strong disinfecting chemicals that act by replacing a hydrogen atom withina molecule with an alkyl group (CnH2n+1), thereby inactivating enzymes and nucleic acids (Figure 13.29). Thealkylating agent formaldehyde (CH2OH) is commonly used in solution at a concentration of 37% (known as formalin)or as a gaseous disinfectant and biocide. It is a strong, broad-spectrum disinfectant and biocide that has the abilityto kill bacteria, viruses, fungi, and endospores, leading to sterilization at low temperatures, which is sometimes aconvenient alternative to the more labor-intensive heat sterilization methods. It also cross-links proteins and has beenLink to Learning20. L. Thomas et al. “Development of Resistance to Chlorhexidine Diacetate in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the Effect of a ‘Residual’Concentration.” Journal of Hospital Infection 46 no. 4 (2000):297–303.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 587widely used as a chemical fixative. Because of this, it is used for the storage of tissue specimens and as an embalmingfluid. It also has been used to inactivate infectious agents in vaccine preparation. Formaldehyde is very irritating toliving tissues and is also carcinogenic; therefore, it is not used as an antiseptic.Glutaraldehyde is structurally similar to formaldehyde but has two reactive aldehyde groups, allowing it to act morequickly than formaldehyde. It is commonly used as a 2% solution for sterilization and is marketed under the brandname Cidex. It is used to disinfect a variety of surfaces and surgical and medical equipment. However, similar toformaldehyde, glutaraldehyde irritates the skin and is not used as an antiseptic.A new type of disinfectant gaining popularity for the disinfection of medical equipment is o-phthalaldehyde (OPA),which is found in some newer formulations of Cidex and similar products, replacing glutaraldehyde. o-Phthalaldehyde also has two reactive aldehyde groups, but they are linked by an aromatic bridge. o-Phthalaldehyde isthought to work similarly to glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde, but is much less irritating to skin and nasal passages,produces a minimal odor, does not require processing before use, and is more effective against mycobacteria.Ethylene oxide is a type of alkylating agent that is used for gaseous sterilization. It is highly penetrating andcan sterilize items within plastic bags such as catheters, disposable items in laboratories and clinical settings (likepackaged Petri dishes), and other pieces of equipment. Ethylene oxide exposure is a form of cold sterilization, makingit useful for the sterilization of heat-sensitive items. Great care needs to be taken with the use of ethylene oxide,however; it is carcinogenic, like the other alkylating agents, and is also highly explosive. With careful use andproper aeration of the products after treatment, ethylene oxide is highly effective, and ethylene oxide sterilizers arecommonly found in medical settings for sterilizing packaged materials.β-Propionolactone is an alkylating agent with a different chemical structure than the others already discussed. Likeother alkylating agents, β-propionolactone binds to DNA, thereby inactivating it (Figure 13.29). It is a clear liquidwith a strong odor and has the ability to kill endospores. As such, it has been used in either liquid form or as a vaporfor the sterilization of medical instruments and tissue grafts, and it is a common component of vaccines, used tomaintain their sterility. It has also been used for the sterilization of nutrient broth, as well as blood plasma, milk, andwater. It is quickly metabolized by animals and humans to lactic acid. It is also an irritant, however, and may lead topermanent damage of the eyes, kidneys, or liver. Additionally, it has been shown to be carcinogenic in animals; thus,precautions are necessary to minimize human exposure to β-propionolactone.[21]21. Institute of Medicine. “Long-Term Health Effects of Participation in Project SHAD (Shipboard Hazard and Defense).” Washington, DC:The National Academies Press, 2007.588 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 13.29 (a) Alkylating agents replace hydrogen atoms with alkyl groups. Here, guanine is alkylated, resulting inits hydrogen bonding with thymine, instead of cytosine. (b) The chemical structures of several alkylating agents.• What chemical reaction do alkylating agents participate in?• Why are alkylating agents not used as antiseptics?Diehard PrionsPrions, the acellular, misfolded proteins responsible for incurable and fatal diseases such as kuru andCreutzfeldt-Jakob disease (see Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions), are notoriously difficult to destroy. Prionsare extremely resistant to heat, chemicals, and radiation. They are also extremely infectious and deadly; thus,handling and disposing of prion-infected items requires extensive training and extreme caution.Typical methods of disinfection can reduce but not eliminate the infectivity of prions. Autoclaving is notcompletely effective, nor are chemicals such as phenol, alcohols, formalin, and β-propiolactone. Even whenfixed in formalin, affected brain and spinal cord tissues remain infectious.Personnel who handle contaminated specimens or equipment or work with infected patients must wear aprotective coat, face protection, and cut-resistant gloves. Any contact with skin must be immediately washedwith detergent and warm water without scrubbing. The skin should then be washed with 1 N NaOH or a1:10 dilution of bleach for 1 minute. Contaminated waste must be incinerated or autoclaved in a strong basicMicro ConnectionsChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 589solution, and instruments must be cleaned and soaked in a strong basic solution.For more information on the handling of animals and prion-contaminatedmaterials, visit the guidelines published on the CDC (https://openstax.org/l/22CDChandanipri) and WHO (https://openstax.org/l/22WHOhandanipri)websites.PeroxygensPeroxygens are strong oxidizing agents that can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics. The most widely usedperoxygen is hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which is often used in solution to disinfect surfaces and may also be used asa gaseous agent. Hydrogen peroxide solutions are inexpensive skin antiseptics that break down into water and oxygengas, both of which are environmentally safe. This decomposition is accelerated in the presence of light, so hydrogenperoxide solutions typically are sold in brown or opaque bottles. One disadvantage of using hydrogen peroxide as anantiseptic is that it also causes damage to skin that may delay healing or lead to scarring. Contact lens cleaners ofteninclude hydrogen peroxide as a disinfectant.Hydrogen peroxide works by producing free radicals that damage cellular macromolecules. Hydrogen peroxide hasbroad-spectrum activity, working against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (with slightly greater efficacyagainst gram-positive bacteria), fungi, viruses, and endospores. However, bacteria that produce the oxygendetoxifyingenzymes catalase or peroxidase may have inherent tolerance to low hydrogen peroxide concentrations(Figure 13.30). To kill endospores, the length of exposure or concentration of solutions of hydrogen peroxide mustbe increased. Gaseous hydrogen peroxide has greater efficacy and can be used as a sterilant for rooms or equipment.Figure 13.30 Catalase enzymatically converts highly reactive hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) into water and oxygen.Hydrogen peroxide can be used to clean wounds. Hydrogen peroxide is used to sterilize items such as contactlenses. (credit photos: modification of work by Kerry Ceszyk)Plasma, a hot, ionized gas, described as the fourth state of matter, is useful for sterilizing equipment becauseit penetrates surfaces and kills vegetative cells and endospores. Hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid, anothercommonly used peroxygen, each may be introduced as a plasma. Peracetic acid can be used as a liquid or plasmasterilant insofar as it readily kills endospores, is more effective than hydrogen peroxide even at rather lowconcentrations, and is immune to inactivation by catalases and peroxidases. It also breaks down to environmentallyLink to Learning590 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5innocuous compounds; in this case, acetic acid and oxygen.Other examples of peroxygens include benzoyl peroxide and carbamide peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is a peroxygenthat used in acne medication solutions. It kills the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes, which is associated withacne. Carbamide peroxide, an ingredient used in toothpaste, is a peroxygen that combats oral biofilms that causetooth discoloration and halitosis (bad breath).[22] Last, ozone gas is a peroxygen with disinfectant qualities and isused to clean air or water supplies. Overall, peroxygens are highly effective and commonly used, with no associatedenvironmental hazard.• How do peroxides kill cells?Supercritical FluidsWithin the last 15 years, the use of supercritical fluids, especially supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2), has gainedpopularity for certain sterilizing applications. When carbon dioxide is brought to approximately 10 times atmosphericpressure, it reaches a supercritical state that has physical properties between those of liquids and gases. Materials putinto a chamber in which carbon dioxide is pressurized in this way can be sterilized because of the ability of scCO2 topenetrate surfaces.Supercritical carbon dioxide works by penetrating cells and forming carbonic acid, thereby lowering the cell pHconsiderably. This technique is effective against vegetative cells and is also used in combination with peracetic acidto kill endospores. Its efficacy can also be augmented with increased temperature or by rapid cycles of pressurizationand depressurization, which more likely produce cell lysis.Benefits of scCO2 include the nonreactive, nontoxic, and nonflammable properties of carbon dioxide, and thisprotocol is effective at low temperatures. Unlike other methods, such as heat and irradiation, that can degrade theobject being sterilized, the use of scCO2 preserves the object’s integrity and is commonly used for treating foods(including spices and juices) and medical devices such as endoscopes. It is also gaining popularity for disinfectingtissues such as skin, bones, tendons, and ligaments prior to transplantation. scCO2 can also be used for pest controlbecause it can kill insect eggs and larvae within products.• Why is the use of supercritical carbon dioxide gaining popularity for commercial and medical uses?Chemical Food PreservativesChemical preservatives are used to inhibit microbial growth and minimize spoilage in some foods. Commonly usedchemical preservatives include sorbic acid, benzoic acid, and propionic acid, and their more soluble salts potassiumsorbate, sodium benzoate, and calcium propionate, all of which are used to control the growth of molds in acidicfoods. Each of these preservatives is nontoxic and readily metabolized by humans. They are also flavorless, so theydo not compromise the flavor of the foods they preserve.Sorbic and benzoic acids exhibit increased efficacy as the pH decreases. Sorbic acid is thought to work by inhibitingvarious cellular enzymes, including those in the citric acid cycle, as well as catalases and peroxidases. It is added asa preservative in a wide variety of foods, including dairy, bread, fruit, and vegetable products. Benzoic acid is found22. Yao, C.S. et al. “In vitro antibacterial effect of carbamide peroxide on oral biofilm.” Journal of Oral Microbiology Jun 12, 2013.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3682087/. doi: 10.3402/jom.v5i0.20392.Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 591naturally in many types of fruits and berries, spices, and fermented products. It is thought to work by decreasingintracellular pH, interfering with mechanisms such as oxidative phosphorylation and the uptake of molecules such asamino acids into cells. Foods preserved with benzoic acid or sodium benzoate include fruit juices, jams, ice creams,pastries, soft drinks, chewing gum, and pickles.Propionic acid is thought to both inhibit enzymes and decrease intracellular pH, working similarly to benzoic acid.However, propionic acid is a more effective preservative at a higher pH than either sorbic acid or benzoic acid.Propionic acid is naturally produced by some cheeses during their ripening and is added to other types of cheese andbaked goods to prevent mold contamination. It is also added to raw dough to prevent contamination by the bacteriumBacillus mesentericus, which causes bread to become ropy.Other commonly used chemical preservatives include sulfur dioxide and nitrites. Sulfur dioxide prevents browningof foods and is used for the preservation of dried fruits; it has been used in winemaking since ancient times. Sulfurdioxide gas dissolves in water readily, forming sulfites. Although sulfites can be metabolized by the body, somepeople have sulfite allergies, including asthmatic reactions. Additionally, sulfites degrade thiamine, an importantnutrient in some foods. The mode of action of sulfites is not entirely clear, but they may interfere with the disulfidebond (see Figure 7.21) formation in proteins, inhibiting enzymatic activity. Alternatively, they may reduce theintracellular pH of the cell, interfering with proton motive force-driven mechanisms.Nitrites are added to processed meats to maintain color and stop the germination of Clostridium botulinumendospores. Nitrites are reduced to nitric oxide, which reacts with heme groups and iron-sulfur groups. When nitricoxide reacts with the heme group within the myoglobin of meats, a red product forms, giving meat its red color.Alternatively, it is thought that when nitric acid reacts with the iron-sulfur enzyme ferredoxin within bacteria, thiselectron transport-chain carrier is destroyed, preventing ATP synthesis. Nitrosamines, however, are carcinogenic andcan be produced through exposure of nitrite-preserved meats (e.g., hot dogs, lunch meat, breakfast sausage, bacon,meat in canned soups) to heat during cooking.Natural Chemical Food PreservativesThe discovery of natural antimicrobial substances produced by other microbes has added to the arsenal ofpreservatives used in food. Nisin is an antimicrobial peptide produced by the bacterium Lactococcus lactis and isparticularly effective against gram-positive organisms. Nisin works by disrupting cell wall production, leaving cellsmore prone to lysis. It is used to preserve cheeses, meats, and beverages.Natamycin is an antifungal macrolide antibiotic produced by the bacterium Streptomyces natalensis. It was approvedby the FDA in 1982 and is used to prevent fungal growth in various types of dairy products, including cottage cheese,sliced cheese, and shredded cheese. Natamycin is also used for meat preservation in countries outside the UnitedStates.• What are the advantages and drawbacks of using sulfites and nitrites as food preservatives?Chemical DisinfectantsChemical Mode of Action Example UsesPhenolics592 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Chemical DisinfectantsChemical Mode of Action Example UsesCresolso-PhenylphenolHexachloropheneTriclosanDenature proteins and disrupt membranesDisinfectant in LysolPrevent contamination ofcrops (citrus)Antibacterial soappHisoHex for handwashingin hospitalsMetalsMercurySilverCopperNickelZincBind to proteins and inhibit enzyme activityTopical antisepticTreatment of wounds andburnsPrevention of eye infectionsin newbornsAntibacterial in cathetersand bandagesMouthwashAlgicide for pools and fishtanksContainers for long-termwater storageHalogensIodineChlorineFluorineOxidation and destabilization of cellular macromoleculesTopical antisepticHand scrub for medicalpersonnelWater disinfectantWater treatment plantsHousehold bleachFood processingPrevention of dental carriesAlcoholsEthanolIsopropanol Denature proteins and disrupt membranes DisinfectantAntisepticSurfactantsQuaternaryammonium saltsLowers surface tension of water to help with washingaway of microbes, and disruption of cell membranesSoaps and detergentDisinfectantAntisepticMouthwashBisbiguanidesChlorhexidineAlexidine Disruption of cell membranesOral rinseHand scrub for medicalpersonnelAlkylating AgentsChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 593Chemical DisinfectantsChemical Mode of Action Example UsesFormaldehydeGlutaraldehydeo-PhthalaldehydeEthylene oxideβ-PropionolactoneInactivation of enzymes and nucleic acidDisinfectantTissue specimen storageEmbalmingSterilization of medicalequipmentVaccine component forsterilityPeroxygensHydrogenperoxidePeracetic acidBenzoyl peroxideCarbamideperoxideOzone gasOxidation and destabilization of cellular macromoleculesAntisepticDisinfectantAcne medicationToothpaste ingredientSupercritical GasesCarbon dioxide Penetrates cells, forms carbonic acid, lowers intracellularpHFood preservationDisinfection of medicaldevicesDisinfection of transplanttissuesChemical Food PreservativesSorbic acidBenzoic acidPropionic acidPotassiumsorbateSodium benzoateCalciumpropionateSulfur dioxideNitritesDecrease pH and inhibit enzymatic function Preservation of foodproductsNatural Food PreservativesNisinNatamycin Inhibition of cell wall synthesis (Nisin)Preservation of dairyproducts, meats, andbeverages594 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.513.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics andDisinfectantsLearning Objectives• Describe why the phenol coefficient is used• Compare and contrast the disk-diffusion, use-dilution, and in-use methods for testing the effectiveness ofantiseptics, disinfectants, and sterilantsThe effectiveness of various chemical disinfectants is reflected in the terms used to describe them. Chemicaldisinfectants are grouped by the power of their activity, with each category reflecting the types of microbes andviruses its component disinfectants are effective against. High-level germicides have the ability to kill vegetativecells, fungi, viruses, and endospores, leading to sterilization, with extended use. Intermediate-level germicides, astheir name suggests, are less effective against endospores and certain viruses, and low-level germicides kill onlyvegetative cells and certain enveloped viruses, and are ineffective against endospores.However, several environmental conditions influence the potency of an antimicrobial agent and its effectiveness. Forexample, length of exposure is particularly important, with longer exposure increasing efficacy. Similarly, theconcentration of the chemical agent is also important, with higher concentrations being more effective than lowerones. Temperature, pH, and other factors can also affect the potency of a disinfecting agent.One method to determine the effectiveness of a chemical agent includes swabbing surfaces before and after use toconfirm whether a sterile field was maintained during use. Additional tests are described in the sections that follow.These tests allow for the maintenance of appropriate disinfection protocols in clinical settings, controlling microbialgrowth to protect patients, health-care workers, and the community.Phenol CoefficientThe effectiveness of a disinfectant or antiseptic can be determined in a number of ways. Historically, a chemicalagent’s effectiveness was often compared with that of phenol, the first chemical agent used by Joseph Lister. In 1903,British chemists Samuel Rideal (1863–1929) and J. T. Ainslie Walker (1868–1930) established a protocol to comparethe effectiveness of a variety of chemicals with that of phenol, using as their test organisms Staphylococcus aureus(a gram-positive bacterium) and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (a gram-negative bacterium). They exposed thetest bacteria to the antimicrobial chemical solutions diluted in water for 7.5 minutes. They then calculated a phenolcoefficient for each chemical for each of the two bacteria tested. A phenol coefficient of 1.0 means that the chemicalagent has about the same level of effectiveness as phenol. A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient of less than 1.0is less effective than phenol. An example is formalin, with phenol coefficients of 0.3 (S. aureus) and 0.7 (S. entericaserovar Typhi). A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient greater than 1.0 is more effective than phenol, such aschloramine, with phenol coefficients of 133 and 100, respectively. Although the phenol coefficient was once a usefulmeasure of effectiveness, it is no longer commonly used because the conditions and organisms used were arbitrarilychosen.• What are the differences between the three levels of disinfectant effectiveness?Disk-Diffusion MethodThe disk-diffusion method involves applying different chemicals to separate, sterile filter paper disks (Figure13.31). The disks are then placed on an agar plate that has been inoculated with the targeted bacterium and thechemicals diffuse out of the disks into the agar where the bacteria have been inoculated. As the “lawn” of bacteriaChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 595grows, zones of inhibition of microbial growth are observed as clear areas around the disks. Although there are otherfactors that contribute to the sizes of zones of inhibition (e.g., whether the agent is water soluble and able to diffusein the agar), larger zones typically correlate to increased inhibition effectiveness of the chemical agent. The diameteracross each zone is measured in millimeters.Figure 13.31 A disk-diffusion assay is used to determine the effectiveness of chemical agents against a particularmicrobe. (a) A plate is inoculated with various antimicrobial discs. The zone of inhibition around each disc indicateshow effective that antimicrobial is against the particular species being tested. (b) On these plates, four antimicrobialagents are tested for efficacy in killing Pseudomonas aeruginosa (left) and Staphylococcus aureus (right). Theseantimicrobials are much more effective at killing S. aureus, as indicated by the size of the zones of inhibition. (creditb: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)• When comparing the activities of two disinfectants against the same microbe, using the disk-diffusion assay,and assuming both are water soluble and can easily diffuse in the agar, would a more effective disinfectanthave a larger zone of inhibition or a smaller one?Use-Dilution TestOther methods are also used for measuring the effectiveness of a chemical agent in clinical settings. The use-dilutiontest is commonly used to determine a chemical’s disinfection effectiveness on an inanimate surface. For this test, acylinder of stainless steel is dipped in a culture of the targeted microorganism and then dried. The cylinder is thendipped in solutions of disinfectant at various concentrations for a specified amount of time. Finally, the cylinder istransferred to a new test tube containing fresh sterile medium that does not contain disinfectant, and this test tube isincubated. Bacterial survival is demonstrated by the presence of turbidity in the medium, whereas killing of the targetorganism on the cylinder by the disinfectant will produce no turbidity.The Association of Official Agricultural Chemists International (AOAC), a nonprofit group that establishes manyprotocol standards, has determined that a minimum of 59 of 60 replicates must show no growth in such a test toachieve a passing result, and the results must be repeatable from different batches of disinfectant and when performedon different days. Disinfectant manufacturers perform use-dilution tests to validate the efficacy claims for theirproducts, as designated by the EPA.596 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Is the use-dilution test performed in a clinical setting? Why?In-Use TestAn in-use test can determine whether an actively used solution of disinfectant in a clinical setting is microbiallycontaminated (Figure 13.32). A 1-mL sample of the used disinfectant is diluted into 9 mL of sterile broth mediumthat also contains a compound to inactivate the disinfectant. Ten drops, totaling approximately 0.2 mL of this mixture,are then inoculated onto each of two agar plates. One plate is incubated at 37 °C for 3 days and the other is incubatedat room temperature for 7 days. The plates are monitored for growth of microbial colonies. Growth of five ormore colonies on either plate suggests that viable microbial cells existed in the disinfectant solution and that it iscontaminated. Such in-use tests monitor the effectiveness of disinfectants in the clinical setting.Figure 13.32 Used disinfectant solutions in a clinical setting can be checked with the in-use test for contaminationwith microbes.• What does a positive in-use test indicate?ResolutionDespite antibiotic treatment, Roberta’s symptoms worsened. She developed pyelonephritis, a severe kidneyClinical FocusChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 597infection, and was rehospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU). Her condition continued to deteriorate, andshe developed symptoms of septic shock. At this point, her physician ordered a culture from her urine todetermine the exact cause of her infection, as well as a drug sensitivity test to determine what antibioticswould be effective against the causative bacterium. The results of this test indicated resistance to a widerange of antibiotics, including the carbapenems, a class of antibiotics that are used as the last resort formany types of bacterial infections. This was an alarming outcome, suggesting that Roberta’s infection wascaused by a so-called superbug: a bacterial strain that has developed resistance to the majority of commonlyused antibiotics. In this case, the causative agent belonged to the carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae(CRE), a drug-resistant family of bacteria normally found in the digestive system (Figure 13.33). When CRE isintroduced to other body systems, as might occur through improperly cleaned surgical instruments, catheters,or endoscopes, aggressive infections can occur.CRE infections are notoriously difficult to treat, with a 40%–50% fatality rate. To treat her kidney infection andseptic shock, Roberta was treated with dialysis, intravenous fluids, and medications to maintain blood pressureand prevent blood clotting. She was also started on aggressive treatment with intravenous administration of anew drug called tigecycline, which has been successful in treating infections caused by drug-resistant bacteria.After several weeks in the ICU, Roberta recovered from her CRE infection. However, public health officialssoon noticed that Roberta’s case was not isolated. Several patients who underwent similar procedures at thesame hospital also developed CRE infections, some dying as a result. Ultimately, the source of the infectionwas traced to the duodenoscopes used in the procedures. Despite the hospital staff meticulously followingmanufacturer protocols for disinfection, bacteria, including CRE, remained within the instruments and wereintroduced to patients during procedures.Figure 13.33 CRE is an extremely drug-resistant strain of bacteria that is typically associated withnosocomial infections. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.598 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Who Is Responsible?Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae infections due to contaminated endoscopes have become a highprofileproblem in recent years. Several CRE outbreaks have been traced to endoscopes, including a caseat Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in early 2015 in which 179 patients may have been exposed to acontaminated endoscope. Seven of the patients developed infections, and two later died. Several lawsuitshave been filed against Olympus, the manufacturer of the endoscopes. Some claim that Olympus did notobtain FDA approval for design changes that may have led to contamination, and others claim that themanufacturer knowingly withheld information from hospitals concerning defects in the endoscopes.Lawsuits like these raise difficult-to-answer questions about liability. Invasive procedures are inherently risky,but negative outcomes can be minimized by strict adherence to established protocols. Who is responsible,however, when negative outcomes occur due to flawed protocols or faulty equipment? Can hospitals or healthcareworkers be held liable if they have strictly followed a flawed procedure? Should manufacturers be heldliable—and perhaps be driven out of business—if their lifesaving equipment fails or is found defective? What isthe government’s role in ensuring that use and maintenance of medical equipment and protocols are fail-safe?Protocols for cleaning or sterilizing medical equipment are often developed by government agencies like theFDA, and other groups, like the AOAC, a nonprofit scientific organization that establishes many protocols forstandard use globally. These procedures and protocols are then adopted by medical device and equipmentmanufacturers. Ultimately, the end-users (hospitals and their staff) are responsible for following theseprocedures and can be held liable if a breach occurs and patients become ill from improperly cleanedequipment.Unfortunately, protocols are not infallible, and sometimes it takes negative outcomes to reveal their flaws.In 2008, the FDA had approved a disinfection protocol for endoscopes, using glutaraldehyde (at a lowerconcentration when mixed with phenol), o-phthalaldehyde, hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, and a mix ofhydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid. However, subsequent CRE outbreaks from endoscope use showedthat this protocol alone was inadequate.As a result of CRE outbreaks, hospitals, manufacturers, and the FDA are investigating solutions. Manyhospitals are instituting more rigorous cleaning procedures than those mandated by the FDA. Manufacturersare looking for ways to redesign duodenoscopes to minimize hard-to-reach crevices where bacteria canescape disinfectants, and the FDA is updating its protocols. In February 2015, the FDA added newrecommendations for careful hand cleaning of the duodenoscope elevator mechanism (the location wheremicrobes are most likely to escape disinfection), and issued more careful documentation about quality controlof disinfection protocols (Figure 13.34).There is no guarantee that new procedures, protocols, or equipment will completely eliminate the riskfor infection associated with endoscopes. Yet these devices are used successfully in 500,000–650,000procedures annually in the United States, many of them lifesaving. At what point do the risks outweigh thebenefits of these devices, and who should be held responsible when negative outcomes occur?Eye on EthicsChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 599Figure 13.34 The elevator mechanism in a duodenoscope contains crevices that are difficult to disinfect.Pathogens that survive disinfection protocols can be passed from one patient to another, causing seriousinfections. (credit “photos”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Summary13.1 Controlling Microbial Growth• Inanimate items that may harbor microbes and aid in their transmission are called fomites. The level ofcleanliness required for a fomite depends both on the item’s use and the infectious agent with which the itemmay be contaminated.• The CDC and the NIH have established four biological safety levels (BSLs) for laboratories performingresearch on infectious agents. Each level is designed to protect laboratory personnel and the community. TheseBSLs are determined by the agent’s infectivity, ease of transmission, and potential disease severity, as well asthe type of work being performed with the agent.• Disinfection removes potential pathogens from a fomite, whereas antisepsis uses antimicrobial chemicalssafe enough for tissues; in both cases, microbial load is reduced, but microbes may remain unless the chemicalused is strong enough to be a sterilant.• The amount of cleanliness (sterilization versus high-level disinfection versus general cleanliness) required foritems used clinically depends on whether the item will come into contact with sterile tissues (critical item),mucous membranes (semicritical item), or intact skin (noncritical item).• Medical procedures with a risk for contamination should be carried out in a sterile field maintained by properaseptic technique to prevent sepsis.• Sterilization is necessary for some medical applications as well as in the food industry, where endospores of600 Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial GrowthThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Clostridium botulinum are killed through commercial sterilization protocols.• Physical or chemical methods to control microbial growth that result in death of the microbe are indicated bythe suffixes -cide or -cidal (e.g., as with bactericides, viricides, and fungicides), whereas those that inhibitmicrobial growth are indicated by the suffixes -stat or-static (e.g., bacteriostatic, fungistatic).• Microbial death curves display the logarithmic decline of living microbes exposed to a method of microbialcontrol. The time it takes for a protocol to yield a 1-log (90%) reduction in the microbial population is thedecimal reduction time, or D-value.• When choosing a microbial control protocol, factors to consider include the length of exposure time, the typeof microbe targeted, its susceptibility to the protocol, the intensity of the treatment, the presence of organicsthat may interfere with the protocol, and the environmental conditions that may alter the effectiveness of theprotocol.13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms• Heat is a widely used and highly effective method for controlling microbial growth.• Dry-heat sterilization protocols are used commonly in aseptic techniques in the laboratory. However, moistheatsterilization is typically the more effective protocol because it penetrates cells better than dry heat does.• Pasteurization is used to kill pathogens and reduce the number of microbes that cause food spoilage. Hightemperature,short-time pasteurization is commonly used to pasteurize milk that will be refrigerated; ultrahightemperature pasteurization can be used to pasteurize milk for long-term storage without refrigeration.• Refrigeration slows microbial growth; freezing stops growth, killing some organisms. Laboratory and medicalspecimens may be frozen on dry ice or at ultra-low temperatures for storage and transport.• High-pressure processing can be used to kill microbes in food. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy to increase oxygensaturation has also been used to treat certain infections.• Desiccation has long been used to preserve foods and is accelerated through the addition of salt or sugar,which decrease water activity in foods.• Lyophilization combines cold exposure and desiccation for the long-term storage of foods and laboratorymaterials, but microbes remain and can be rehydrated.• Ionizing radiation, including gamma irradiation, is an effective way to sterilize heat-sensitive and packagedmaterials. Nonionizing radiation, like ultraviolet light, is unable to penetrate surfaces but is useful for surfacesterilization.• HEPA filtration is commonly used in hospital ventilation systems and biological safety cabinets inlaboratories to prevent transmission of airborne microbes. Membrane filtration is commonly used to removebacteria from heat-sensitive solutions.13.3 Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms• Heavy metals, including mercury, silver, copper, and zinc, have long been used for disinfection andpreservation, although some have toxicity and environmental risks associated with them.• Halogens, including chlorine, fluorine, and iodine, are also commonly used for disinfection. Chlorinecompounds, including sodium hypochlorite, chloramines, and chlorine dioxide, are commonly used forwater disinfection. Iodine, in both tincture and iodophor forms, is an effective antiseptic.• Alcohols, including ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol, are commonly used antiseptics that act by denaturingproteins and disrupting membranes.• Phenolics are stable, long-acting disinfectants that denature proteins and disrupt membranes. They arecommonly found in household cleaners, mouthwashes, and hospital disinfectants, and are also used topreserve harvested crops.• The phenolic compound triclosan, found in antibacterial soaps, plastics, and textiles is technically anantibiotic because of its specific mode of action of inhibiting bacterial fatty-acid synthesis..• Surfactants, including soaps and detergents, lower the surface tension of water to create emulsions thatmechanically carry away microbes. Soaps are long-chain fatty acids, whereas detergents are syntheticChapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth 601surfactants.• Quaternary ammonium compounds (quats) are cationic detergents that disrupt membranes. They are usedin household cleaners, skin disinfectants, oral rinses, and mouthwashes.• Bisbiguanides disrupt cell membranes, causing cell contents to gel. Chlorhexidine and alexidine arecommonly used for surgical scrubs, for handwashing in clinical settings, and in prescription oral rinses.• Alkylating agents effectively sterilize materials at low temperatures but are carcinogenic and may alsoirritate tissue. Glutaraldehyde and o-phthalaldehyde are used as hospital disinfectants but not as antiseptics.Formaldehyde is used for the storage of tissue specimens, as an embalming fluid, and in vaccine preparationto inactivate infectious agents. Ethylene oxide is a gas sterilant that can permeate heat-sensitive packagedmaterials, but it is also explosive and carcinogenic.• Peroxygens, including hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and ozone gas, are strongoxidizing agents that produce free radicals in cells, damaging their macromolecules. They are environmentallysafe and are highly effective disinfectants and antiseptics.• Pressurized carbon dioxide in the form of a supercritical fluid easily permeates packaged materials andcells, forming carbonic acid and lowering intracellular pH. Supercritical carbon dioxide is nonreactive,nontoxic, nonflammable, and effective at low temperatures for sterilization of medical devices, implants, andtransplanted tissues.• Chemical preservatives are added to a variety of foods. Sorbic acid, benzoic acid, propionic acid, and theirmore soluble salts inhibit enzymes or reduce intracellular pH.• Sulfites are used in winemaking and food processing to prevent browning of foods.• Nitrites are used to preserve meats and maintain color, but cooking nitrite-preserved meats may producecarcinogenic nitrosamines.• Nisin and natamycin are naturally produced preservatives used in cheeses and meats. Nisin is effectiveagainst gram-positive bacteria and natamycin against fungi.13.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics and Disinfectants• Chemical disinfectants are grouped by the types of microbes and infectious agents they are effective against.High-level germicides kill vegetative cells, fungi, viruses, and endospores, and can ultimately lead tosterilization. Intermediate-level germicides cannot kill all viruses and are less effective against endospores.Low-level germicides kill vegetative cells and some enveloped viruses, but are ineffective againstendospores.• The effectiveness of a disinfectant is influenced by several factors, including length of exposure, concentrationof disinfectant, temperature, and pH.• Historically, the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant was compared with that of phenol at killingStaphylococcus aureus and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, and a phenol coefficient was calculated.• The disk-diffusion method is used to test the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant against a particularmicrobe.• The use-dilution test determines the effectiveness of a disinfectant on a surface. In-use tests can determinewhether disinfectant solutions are being used correctly in clinical settings.