Chapter 22Respiratory System InfectionsFigure 22.1 Aerosols produced by sneezing, coughing, or even just speaking are an important mechanism forrespiratory pathogen transmission. Simple actions, like covering your mouth when coughing or sneezing, can reducethe spread of these microbes. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chapter Outline22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract22.4 Respiratory MycosesIntroductionThe respiratory tract is one of the main portals of entry into the human body for microbial pathogens. On average,a human takes about 20,000 breaths each day. This roughly corresponds to 10,000 liters, or 10 cubic meters, of air.Suspended within this volume of air are millions of microbes of terrestrial, animal, and human origin—includingmany potential pathogens. A few of these pathogens will cause relatively mild infections like sore throats and colds.Others, however, are less benign. According to the World Health Organization, respiratory tract infections such astuberculosis, influenza, and pneumonia were responsible for more than 4 million deaths worldwide in 2012.[1]At one time, it was thought that antimicrobial drugs and preventive vaccines might hold respiratory infections incheck in the developed world, but recent developments suggest otherwise. The rise of multiple-antibiotic resistance inorganisms like Mycobacterium tuberculosis has rendered many of our modern drugs ineffective. In addition, there hasbeen a recent resurgence in diseases like whooping cough and measles, once-common childhood illnesses made rareby effective vaccines. Despite advances in medicine and public health programs, it is likely that respiratory pathogenswill remain formidable adversaries for the foreseeable future.22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory1. World Health Organization. “The Top Ten Causes of Death.” May 2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 959TractLearning Objectives• Describe the major anatomical features of the upper and lower respiratory tract• Describe the normal microbiota of the upper and lower respiratory tracts• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of upper and lower respiratory-tract membranes to causeinfection• Explain how microbes and the respiratory system interact and modify each other in healthy individuals andduring an infectionThe primary function of the respiratory tract is to exchange gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide) for metabolism.However, inhalation and exhalation (particularly when forceful) can also serve as a vehicle of transmission forpathogens between individuals.Anatomy of the Upper Respiratory SystemThe respiratory system can be conceptually divided into upper and lower regions at the point of the epiglottis, thestructure that seals off the lower respiratory system from the pharynx during swallowing (Figure 22.2). The upperrespiratory system is in direct contact with the external environment. The nares (or nostrils) are the external openingsof the nose that lead back into the nasal cavity, a large air-filled space behind the nares. These anatomical sitesconstitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract, respectively. The nasal cavity is lined withhairs that trap large particles, like dust and pollen, and prevent their access to deeper tissues. The nasal cavity is alsolined with a mucous membrane and Bowman’s glands that produce mucus to help trap particles and microorganismsfor removal. The nasal cavity is connected to several other air-filled spaces. The sinuses, a set of four, paired smallcavities in the skull, communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small openings. The nasopharynx ispart of the upper throat extending from the posterior nasal cavity. The nasopharynx carries air inhaled through thenose. The middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube. The middle ear is separated fromthe outer ear by the tympanic membrane, or ear drum. And finally, the lacrimal glands drain to the nasal cavitythrough the nasolacrimal ducts (tear ducts). The open connections between these sites allow microorganisms tomove from the nasal cavity to the sinuses, middle ears (and back), and down into the lower respiratory tract from thenasopharynx.Part 1John, a 65-year-old man with asthma and type 2 diabetes, works as a sales associate at a local homeimprovement store. Recently, he began to feel quite ill and made an appointment with his family physician. Atthe clinic, John reported experiencing headache, chest pain, coughing, and shortness of breath. Over the pastday, he had also experienced some nausea and diarrhea. A nurse took his temperature and found that he wasrunning a fever of 40 °C (104 °F).John suggested that he must have a case of influenza (flu), and regretted that he had put off getting his fluvaccine this year. After listening to John’s breathing through a stethoscope, the physician ordered a chestradiography and collected blood, urine, and sputum samples.• Based on this information, what factors may have contributed to John’s illness?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus960 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The oral cavity is a secondary opening for the respiratory tract. The oral and nasal cavities connect through the faucesto the pharynx, or throat. The pharynx can be divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and thelaryngopharynx. Air inhaled through the mouth does not pass through the nasopharynx; it proceeds first through theoropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx. The palatine tonsils, which consist of lymphoid tissue, are locatedwithin the oropharynx. The laryngopharynx, the last portion of the pharynx, connects to the larynx, which containsthe vocal fold (Figure 22.2).Figure 22.2 (a) The ear is connected to the upper respiratory tract by the eustachian tube, which opens to thenasopharynx. (b) The structures of the upper respiratory tract.• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from thenares to the larynx.• What two anatomical points do the eustachian tubes connect?Anatomy of the Lower Respiratory SystemThe lower respiratory system begins below the epiglottis in the larynx or voice box (Figure 22.3). The trachea, orwindpipe, is a cartilaginous tube extending from the larynx that provides an unobstructed path for air to reach thelungs. The trachea bifurcates into the left and right bronchi as it reaches the lungs. These paths branch repeatedly toform smaller and more extensive networks of tubes, the bronchioles. The terminal bronchioles formed in this treelikenetwork end in cul-de-sacs called the alveoli. These structures are surrounded by capillary networks and arethe site of gas exchange in the respiratory system. Human lungs contain on the order of 400,000,000 alveoli. Theouter surface of the lungs is protected with a double-layered pleural membrane. This structure protects the lungs andprovides lubrication to permit the lungs to move easily during respiration.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 961Figure 22.3 The structures of the lower respiratory tract are identified in this illustration. (credit: modification of workby National Cancer Institute)Defenses of the Respiratory SystemThe inner lining of the respiratory system consists of mucous membranes (Figure 22.4) and is protected by multipleimmune defenses. The goblet cells within the respiratory epithelium secrete a layer of sticky mucus. The viscosity andacidity of this secretion inhibits microbial attachment to the underlying cells. In addition, the respiratory tract containsciliated epithelial cells. The beating cilia dislodge and propel the mucus, and any trapped microbes, upward to theepiglottis, where they will be swallowed. Elimination of microbes in this manner is referred to as the mucociliaryescalator effect and is an important mechanism that prevents inhaled microorganisms from migrating further into thelower respiratory tract.962 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.4 This micrograph shows the structure of the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract. (credit:modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)The upper respiratory system is under constant surveillance by mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), includingthe adenoids and tonsils. Other mucosal defenses include secreted antibodies (IgA), lysozyme, surfactant, andantimicrobial peptides called defensins. Meanwhile, the lower respiratory tract is protected by alveolar macrophages.These phagocytes efficiently kill any microbes that manage to evade the other defenses. The combined action of thesefactors renders the lower respiratory tract nearly devoid of colonized microbes.• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from thelarynx to the alveoli.• Name some defenses of the respiratory system that protect against microbial infection.Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory SystemThe upper respiratory tract contains an abundant and diverse microbiota. The nasal passages and sinuses are primarilycolonized by members of the Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria. The most common bacteria identifiedinclude Staphylococcus epidermidis, viridans group streptococci (VGS), Corynebacterium spp. (diphtheroids),Propionibacterium spp., and Haemophilus spp. The oropharynx includes many of the same isolates as the nose andsinuses, with the addition of variable numbers of bacteria like species of Prevotella, Fusobacterium, Moraxella,and Eikenella, as well as some Candida fungal isolates. In addition, many healthy humans asymptomatically carrypotential pathogens in the upper respiratory tract. As much as 20% of the population carry Staphylococcus aureusin their nostrils.[2] The pharynx, too, can be colonized with pathogenic strains of Streptococcus, Haemophilus, andNeisseria.2. J. Kluytmans et al. “Nasal Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus: Epidemiology, Underlying Mechanisms, and Associated Risks.” ClinicalMicrobiology Reviews 10 no. 3 (1997):505–520.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 963The lower respiratory tract, by contrast, is scantily populated with microbes. Of the organisms identified in the lowerrespiratory tract, species of Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Prevotella, Fusobacterium, and Veillonella are the mostcommon. It is not clear at this time if these small populations of bacteria constitute a normal microbiota or if they aretransients.Many members of the respiratory system’s normal microbiota are opportunistic pathogens. To proliferate and causehost damage, they first must overcome the immune defenses of respiratory tissues. Many mucosal pathogens producevirulence factors such as adhesins that mediate attachment to host epithelial cells, or polysaccharide capsules thatallow microbes to evade phagocytosis. The endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria can stimulate a strong inflammatoryresponse that damages respiratory cells. Other pathogens produce exotoxins, and still others have the ability to survivewithin the host cells. Once an infection of the respiratory tract is established, it tends to impair the mucociliaryescalator, limiting the body’s ability to expel the invading microbes, thus making it easier for pathogens to multiplyand spread.Vaccines have been developed for many of the most serious bacterial and viral pathogens. Several of the mostimportant respiratory pathogens and their vaccines, if available, are summarized in Table 22.1. Components of thesevaccines will be explained later in the chapter.Some Important Respiratory Diseases and VaccinesDisease Pathogen Available Vaccine(s)[3]Chickenpox/shingles Varicella-zoster virus Varicella (chickenpox) vaccine, herpes zoster(shingles) vaccineCommon cold Rhinovirus NoneDiphtheria Corynebacteriumdiphtheriae DtaP, Tdap, DT,Td, DTPEpiglottitis, otitis media Haemophilus influenzae HibInfluenza Influenza viruses Inactivated, FluMistMeasles Measles virus MMRPertussis Bordetella pertussis DTaP, TdapPneumonia StreptococcuspneumoniaePneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13),pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)Rubella (Germanmeasles) Rubella virus MMRSevere acute respiratorysyndrome (SARS)SARS-associatedcoronavirus (SARSCoV)NoneTuberculosis Mycobacteriumtuberculosis BCGTable 22.13. Full names of vaccines listed in table: Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib); Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DtaP);tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap); diphtheria and tetanus (DT); tetanus and diphtheria (Td); diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus(DTP); Bacillus Calmette-Guérin; Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)964 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What are some pathogenic bacteria that are part of the normal microbiota of the respiratory tract?• What virulence factors are used by pathogens to overcome the immune protection of the respiratory tract?Signs and Symptoms of Respiratory InfectionMicrobial diseases of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response. These infections canbe grouped by the location affected and have names ending in “itis”, which literally means inflammation of. Forinstance, rhinitis is an inflammation of the nasal cavities, often characteristic of the common cold. Rhinitis may alsobe associated with hay fever allergies or other irritants. Inflammation of the sinuses is called sinusitis inflammation ofthe ear is called otitis. Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear. A variety of microbes can cause pharyngitis,commonly known as a sore throat. An inflammation of the larynx is called laryngitis. The resulting inflammationmay interfere with vocal cord function, causing voice loss. When tonsils are inflamed, it is called tonsillitis. Chroniccases of tonsillitis may be treated surgically with tonsillectomy. More rarely, the epiglottis can be infected, a conditioncalled epiglottitis. In the lower respiratory system, the inflammation of the bronchial tubes results in bronchitis.Most serious of all is pneumonia, in which the alveoli in the lungs are infected and become inflamed. Pus and edemaaccumulate and fill the alveoli with fluids (called consolidations). This reduces the lungs’ ability to exchange gasesand often results in a productive cough expelling phlegm and mucus. Cases of pneumonia can range from mild tolife-threatening, and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old.• Describe the typical symptoms of rhinitis, sinusitis, pharyngitis, and laryngitis.Smoking-Associated PneumoniaCamila is a 22-year-old student who has been a chronic smoker for 5 years. Recently, she developeda persistent cough that has not responded to over-the-counter treatments. Her doctor ordered a chestradiograph to investigate. The radiological results were consistent with pneumonia. In addition, Streptococcuspneumoniae was isolated from Camila’s sputum.Smokers are at a greater risk of developing pneumonia than the general population. Several componentsof tobacco smoke have been demonstrated to impair the lungs’ immune defenses. These effects includedisrupting the function of the ciliated epithelial cells, inhibiting phagocytosis, and blocking the action ofantimicrobial peptides. Together, these lead to a dysfunction of the mucociliary escalator effect. The organismstrapped in the mucus are therefore able to colonize the lungs and cause infections rather than being expelledor swallowed.Case in PointChapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 96522.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases of the respiratory tractThe respiratory tract can be infected by a variety of bacteria, both gram positive and gram negative. Although thediseases that they cause may range from mild to severe, in most cases, the microbes remain localized within therespiratory system. Fortunately, most of these infections also respond well to antibiotic therapy.Streptococcal InfectionsA common upper respiratory infection, streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) is caused by Streptococcuspyogenes. This gram-positive bacterium appears as chains of cocci, as seen in Figure 22.5. Rebecca Lancefieldserologically classified streptococci in the 1930s using carbohydrate antigens from the bacterial cell walls. S.pyogenes is the sole member of the Lancefield group A streptococci and is often referred to as GAS, or group A strep.Figure 22.5 This scanning electron micrograph of Streptococcus pyogenes shows the characteristic cellularphenotype resembling chains of cocci. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Centers for Disease Control andPrevention - Medical Illustrator)Similar to streptococcal infections of the skin, the mucosal membranes of the pharynx are damaged by the releaseof a variety of exoenzymes and exotoxins by this extracellular pathogen. Many strains of S. pyogenes can degradeconnective tissues by using hyaluronidase, collagenase and streptokinase. Streptokinase activates plasmin, whichleads to degradation of fibrin and, in turn, dissolution of blood clots, which assists in the spread of the pathogen.Released toxins include streptolysins that can destroy red and white blood cells. The classic signs of streptococcalpharyngitis are a fever higher than 38 °C (100.4 °F); intense pharyngeal pain; erythema associated with pharyngealinflammation; and swollen, dark-red palatine tonsils, often dotted with patches of pus; and petechiae (microcapillaryhemorrhages) on the soft or hard palate (roof of the mouth) (Figure 22.6). The submandibular lymph nodes beneaththe angle of the jaw are also often swollen during strep throat.Some strains of group A streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin. This exotoxin is encoded by a temperatebacteriophage (bacterial virus) and is an example of phage conversion (see The Viral Life Cycle). The toxin attacksthe plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells and leads to scarlet fever (or scarlatina), a disseminated finered rash on the skin, and strawberry tongue, a red rash on the tongue (Figure 22.6). Severe cases may even lead to966 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS), which results from massive superantigen production that leads to septicshock and death.S. pyogenes can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through coughing and sneezing. The diseasecan be diagnosed quickly using a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group A antigen. However, due to a significantrate of false-negative results (up to 30%[4]), culture identification is still the gold standard to confirm pharyngitis dueto S. pyogenes. S. pyogenes can be identified as a catalase-negative, beta hemolytic bacterium that is susceptible to0.04 units of bacitracin. Antibiotic resistance is limited for this bacterium, so most β-lactams remain effective; oralamoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin G are those most commonly prescribed.Figure 22.6 Streptococcal infections of the respiratory tract may cause localized pharyngitis or systemic signs andsymptoms. (a) The characteristic appearance of strep throat: bright red arches of inflammation with the presence ofdark-red spots (petechiae). (b) Scarlet fever presents as a rash on the skin. (credit a: modification of work by Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Alicia Williams)Sequelae of S. pyogenes InfectionsOne reason strep throat infections are aggressively treated with antibiotics is because they can lead to serioussequelae, later clinical consequences of a primary infection. It is estimated that 1%–3% of untreated S. pyogenesinfections can be followed by nonsuppurative (without the production of pus) sequelae that develop 1–3 weeks afterthe acute infection has resolved. Two such sequelae are acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis.Acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis caused by specific rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes (strains 1,3, 5, 6, and 18). Although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remains unclear, molecular mimicrybetween the M protein of rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes and heart tissue is thought to initiate the autoimmuneattack. The most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever is damage to and inflammation of theheart (carditis). Acute glomerulonephritis also results from an immune response to streptococcal antigens followingpharyngitis and cutaneous infections. Acute glomerulonephritis develops within 6–10 days after pharyngitis, butcan take up to 21 days after a cutaneous infection. Similar to acute rheumatic fever, there are strong associationsbetween specific nephritogenic strains of S. pyogenes and acute glomerulonephritis, and evidence suggests a rolefor antigen mimicry and autoimmunity. However, the primary mechanism of acute glomerulonephritis appears tobe the formation of immune complexes between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies, and their deposition betweenendothelial cells of the glomeruli of kidney. Inflammatory response against the immune complexes leads to damageand inflammation of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis).4. WL Lean et al. “Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: A Meta-Analysis.” Pediatrics 134, no. 4(2014):771–781.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 967• What are the symptoms of strep throat?• What is erythrogenic toxin and what effect does it have?• What are the causes of rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis?Acute Otitis MediaAn infection of the middle ear is called acute otitis media (AOM), but often it is simply referred to as an earache.The condition is most common between ages 3 months and 3 years. In the United States, AOM is the second-leadingcause of visits to pediatricians by children younger than age 5 years, and it is the leading indication for antibioticprescription.[5]AOM is characterized by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear. Unable to drain, the pus builds up,resulting in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia (ear pain). Inflammation resulting fromthe infection leads to swelling of the eustachian tubes, and may also lead to fever, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea,particularly in infants. Infants and toddlers who cannot yet speak may exhibit nonverbal signs suggesting AOM, suchas holding, tugging, or rubbing of the ear, as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the pain.AOM can be caused by a variety of bacteria. Among neonates, S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of AOM,but Escherichia coli, Enterococcus spp., and group B Streptococcus species can also be involved. In older infants andchildren younger than 14 years old, the most common bacterial causes are S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae,or Moraxella catarrhalis. Among S. pneumoniae infections, encapsulated strains are frequent causes of AOM. Bycontrast, the strains of H. influenzae and M. cattarhalis that are responsible for AOM do not possess a capsule.Rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogens, bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in gramnegativepathogens induce an inflammatory response that causes swelling, pus, and tissue damage within the middleear (Figure 22.7).Any blockage of the eustachian tubes, with or without infection, can cause fluid to become trapped and accumulatein the middle ear. This is referred to as otitis media with effusion (OME). The accumulated fluid offers anexcellent reservoir for microbial growth and, consequently, secondary bacterial infections often ensue. This can leadto recurring and chronic earaches, which are especially common in young children. The higher incidence in childrencan be attributed to many factors. Children have more upper respiratory infections, in general, and their eustachiantubes are also shorter and drain at a shallower angle. Young children also tend to spend more time lying down thanadults, which facilitates drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear. Bottlefeeding while lying down enhances this risk because the sucking action on the bottle causes negative pressure to buildup within the eustachian tube, promoting the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx.Diagnosis is typically made based on clinical signs and symptoms, without laboratory testing to determine thespecific causative agent. Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for the treatment of AOM. High-dose amoxicillin isthe first-line drug, but with increasing resistance concerns, macrolides and cephalosporins may also be used. Thepneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) contains serotypes that are important causes of AOM, and vaccinationhas been shown to decrease the incidence of AOM. Vaccination against influenza has also been shown to decreasethe risk for AOM, likely because viral infections like influenza predispose patients to secondary infections withS. pneumoniae. Although there is a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype B of H. influenzae, thisvaccine does not impact the incidence of H. influenzae AOM. Because unencapsulated strains of H. influenzae andM. catarrhalis are involved in AOM, vaccines against bacterial cellular factors other than capsules will need to bedeveloped.5. G. Worrall. “Acute Otitis Media.” Canadian Family Physician 53 no. 12 (2007):2147–2148.968 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.7 (a) A healthy tympanic membrane; the middle ear bones can be seen behind the membrane. (b) An earwith chronic inflammation that has resulted in a torn membrane, erosion of the inner ear bones, and mucus buildup.(credit a: modification of work by “DrER.tv”/YouTube; credit b: modification of work by Li Mg, Hotez PJ, Vrabec JT,Donovan DT)Bacterial RhinosinusitisThe microbial community of the nasopharynx is extremely diverse and harbors many opportunistic pathogens,so it is perhaps not surprising that infections leading to rhinitis and sinusitis have many possible causes. Theseconditions often occur as secondary infections after a viral infection, which effectively compromises the immunedefenses and allows the opportunistic bacteria to establish themselves. Bacterial sinusitis involves infection andinflammation within the paranasal sinuses. Because bacterial sinusitis rarely occurs without rhinitis, the preferredterm is rhinosinusitis. The most common causes of bacterial rhinosinusitis are similar to those for AOM, including S.pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis.• What are the usual causative agents of acute otitis media?• What factors facilitate acute otitis media with effusion in young children?• What factor often triggers bacterial rhinosinusitis?DiphtheriaThe causative agent of diphtheria, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is a club-shaped, gram-positive rod that belongs tothe phylum Actinobacteria. Diphtheroids are common members of the normal nasopharyngeal microbiota. However,some strains of C. diphtheriae become pathogenic because of the presence of a temperate bacteriophage-encodedprotein—the diphtheria toxin. Diphtheria is typically a respiratory infection of the oropharynx but can also causeimpetigo-like lesions on the skin. Although the disease can affect people of all ages, it tends to be most severe in thoseyounger than 5 years or older than 40 years. Like strep throat, diphtheria is commonly transmitted in the dropletsand aerosols produced by coughing. After colonizing the throat, the bacterium remains in the oral cavity and beginsChapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 969producing the diphtheria toxin. This protein is an A-B toxin that blocks host-cell protein synthesis by inactivatingelongation factor (EF)-2 (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). The toxin’s action leadsto the death of the host cells and an inflammatory response. An accumulation of grayish exudate consisting of deadhost cells, pus, red blood cells, fibrin, and infectious bacteria results in the formation of a pseudomembrane. Thepseudomembrane can cover mucous membranes of the nasal cavity, tonsils, pharynx, and larynx (Figure 22.8). Thisis a classic sign of diphtheria. As the disease progresses, the pseudomembrane can enlarge to obstruct the fauces of thepharynx or trachea and can lead to suffocation and death. Sometimes, intubation, the placement of a breathing tubein the trachea, is required in advanced infections. If the diphtheria toxin spreads throughout the body, it can damageother tissues as well. This can include myocarditis (heart damage) and nerve damage that may impair breathing.Figure 22.8 The pseudomembrane in a patient with diphtheria presents as a leathery gray patch consisting of deadcells, pus, fibrin, red blood cells, and infectious microbes. (credit: modification of work by Putnong N, Agustin G,Pasubillo M, Miyagi K, Dimaano EM)The presumptive diagnosis of diphtheria is primarily based on the clinical symptoms (i.e., the pseudomembrane)and vaccination history, and is typically confirmed by identifying bacterial cultures obtained from throat swabs.The diphtheria toxin itself can be directly detected in vitro using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based, directdetection systems for the diphtheria tox gene, and immunological techniques like radial immunodiffusion or Elek’simmunodiffusion test.Broad-spectrum antibiotics like penicillin and erythromycin tend to effectively control C. diphtheriae infections.Regrettably, they have no effect against preformed toxins. If toxin production has already occurred in the patient,antitoxins (preformed antibodies against the toxin) are administered. Although this is effective in neutralizing thetoxin, the antitoxins may lead to serum sickness because they are produced in horses (see Hypersensitivities).Widespread vaccination efforts have reduced the occurrence of diphtheria worldwide. There are currently fourcombination toxoid vaccines available that provide protection against diphtheria and other diseases: DTaP, Tdap, DT,and Td. In all cases, the letters “d,” “t,” and “p” stand for diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis, respectively; the “a”stands for acellular. If capitalized, the letters indicate a full-strength dose; lowercase letters indicate reduced dosages.According to current recommendations, children should receive five doses of the DTaP vaccine in their youth and aTd booster every 10 years. Children with adverse reactions to the pertussis vaccine may be given the DT vaccine inplace of the DTaP.970 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What effect does diphtheria toxin have?• What is the pseudomembrane composed of?Bacterial PneumoniaPneumonia is a general term for infections of the lungs that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluids andwhite blood cells in the alveoli. Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other organisms, althoughthe vast majority of pneumonias are bacterial in origin. Bacterial pneumonia is a prevalent, potentially seriousinfection; it caused more 50,000 deaths in the United States in 2014.[6] As the alveoli fill with fluids and whiteblood cells (consolidation), air exchange becomes impaired and patients experience respiratory distress (Figure22.9). In addition, pneumonia can lead to pleurisy, an infection of the pleural membrane surrounding the lungs,which can make breathing very painful. Although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the rightcircumstances, three bacterial species cause most clinical cases: Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. influenzae, andMycoplasma pneumoniae. In addition to these, we will also examine some of the less common causes of pneumonia.Figure 22.9 A chest radiograph of a patient with pneumonia shows the consolidations (lesions) present as opaquepatches. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Pneumococcal PneumoniaThe most common cause of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. This grampositive,alpha hemolytic streptococcus is commonly found as part of the normal microbiota of the human respiratorytract. The cells tend to be somewhat lancet-shaped and typically appear as pairs (Figure 22.10). The pneumococciinitially colonize the bronchioles of the lungs. Eventually, the infection spreads to the alveoli, where the microbe’spolysaccharide capsule interferes with phagocytic clearance. Other virulence factors include autolysins like LytA, which degrade the microbial cell wall, resulting in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic virulence factors.One of these factors, pneumolysin O, is important in disease progression; this pore-forming protein damages hostcells, promotes bacterial adherence, and enhances pro-inflammatory cytokine production. The resulting inflammatoryresponse causes the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophils and red blood cells. As a consequence, infectedindividuals develop a productive cough with bloody sputum.6. KD Kochanek et al. “Deaths: Final Data for 2014.” National Vital Statistics Reports 65 no 4 (2016).Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 971Figure 22.10 (a) This micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae grown from a blood culture shows the characteristiclancet-shaped diplococcal morphology. (b) A colorized scanning electron micrograph of S. pneumoniae. (credit a:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Janice Carr,Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Pneumococci can be presumptively identified by their distinctive gram-positive, lancet-shaped cell morphologyand diplococcal arrangement. In blood agar cultures, the organism demonstrates alpha hemolytic colonies that areautolytic after 24 to 48 hours. In addition, S. pneumoniae is extremely sensitive to optochin and colonies are rapidlydestroyed by the addition of 10% solution of sodium deoxycholate. All clinical pneumococcal isolates are serotypedusing the quellung reaction with typing antisera produced by the CDC. Positive quellung reactions are considereddefinitive identification of pneumococci.Antibiotics remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci. β-Lactams like penicillin are the first-line drugs, butresistance to β-lactams is a growing problem. When β-lactam resistance is a concern, macrolides and fluoroquinolonesmay be prescribed. However, S. pneumoniae resistance to macrolides and fluoroquinolones is increasing as well,limiting the therapeutic options for some infections. There are currently two pneumococcal vaccines available:pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). These are generallygiven to the most vulnerable populations of individuals: children younger than 2 years and adults older than 65 years.Haemophilus PneumoniaEncapsulated strains of Haemophilus influenzae are known for causing meningitis, but nonencapsulated strains areimportant causes of pneumonia. This small, gram-negative coccobacillus is found in the pharynx of the majorityof healthy children; however, Haemophilus pneumonia is primarily seen in the elderly. Like other pathogens thatcause pneumonia, H. influenzae is spread by droplets and aerosols produced by coughing. A fastidious organism, H.influenzae will only grow on media with available factor X (hemin) and factor V (NAD), like chocolate agar (Figure22.11). Serotyping must be performed to confirm identity of H. influenzae isolates.Infections of the alveoli by H. influenzae result in inflammation and accumulation of fluids. Increasing resistance toβ-lactams, macrolides, and tetracyclines presents challenges for the treatment of Haemophilus pneumonia. Resistanceto the fluoroquinolones is rare among isolates of H. influenzae but has been observed. As discussed for AOM, avaccine directed against nonencapsulated H. influenzae, if developed, would provide protection against pneumoniacaused by this pathogen.972 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.11 Culture of Haemophilus influenzae on a chocolate agar plate. (credit: modification of work by Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention)Why Me?Tracy is a 6-year old who developed a serious cough that would not seem to go away. After 2 weeks, herparents became concerned and took her to the pediatrician, who suspected a case of bacterial pneumonia.Tests confirmed that the cause was Haemophilus influenzae. Fortunately, Tracy responded well to antibiotictreatment and eventually made a full recovery.Because there had been several other cases of bacterial pneumonia at Tracy’s elementary school, local healthofficials urged parents to have their children screened. Of the children who were screened, it was discoveredthat greater than 50% carried H. influenzae in their nasal cavities, yet all but two of them were asymptomatic.Why is it that some individuals become seriously ill from bacterial infections that seem to have little or noeffect on others? The pathogenicity of an organism—its ability to cause host damage—is not solely a propertyof the microorganism. Rather, it is the product of a complex relationship between the microbe’s virulencefactors and the immune defenses of the individual. Preexisting conditions and environmental factors suchas exposure to secondhand smoke can make some individuals more susceptible to infection by producingconditions favorable to microbial growth or compromising the immune system. In addition, individuals mayhave genetically determined immune factors that protect them—or not—from particular strains of pathogens.The interactions between these host factors and the pathogenicity factors produced by the microorganismultimately determine the outcome of the infection. A clearer understanding of these interactions may allow forbetter identification of at-risk individuals and prophylactic interventions in the future.Mycoplasma Pneumonia (Walking Pneumonia)Primary atypical pneumonia is caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This bacterium is not part of the respiratorytract’s normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreaks. Also known as walking pneumonia, mycoplasmapneumonia infections are common in crowded environments like college campuses and military bases. It is spread byaerosols formed when coughing or sneezing. The disease is often mild, with a low fever and persistent cough. Thesebacteria, which do not have cell walls, use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to ciliated cells. In the process,epithelial cells are damaged and the proper function of the cilia is hindered (Figure 22.12).Case in PointChapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 973Mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured. Therefore, penicillin and thallium acetate are added to agar to preventthe overgrowth by faster-growing potential contaminants. Since M. pneumoniae does not have a cell wall, it isresistant to these substances. Without a cell wall, the microbial cells appear pleomorphic. M. pneumoniae infectionstend to be self-limiting but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy. β-lactams, which target cell wallsynthesis, are not indicated for treatment of infections with this pathogen.Figure 22.12 The micrograph shows Mycoplasma pneumoniae using their specialized receptors to attach toepithelial cells in the trachea of an infected hamster. (credit: modification of work by American Society forMicrobiology)Chlamydial Pneumonias and PsittacosisChlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three different species of bacteria: Chlamydophila pneumoniae (formerlyknown as Chlamydia pneumoniae), Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly known as Chlamydia psittaci), and Chlamydiatrachomatis. All three are obligate intracellular pathogens and cause mild to severe pneumonia and bronchitis. Ofthe three, Chlamydophila pneumoniae is the most common and is transmitted via respiratory droplets or aerosols. C.psittaci causes psittacosis, a zoonotic disease that primarily affects domesticated birds such as parakeets, turkeys,and ducks, but can be transmitted from birds to humans. Psittacosis is a relatively rare infection and is typicallyfound in people who work with birds. Chlamydia trachomatis, the causative agent of the sexually transmitted diseasechlamydia, can cause pneumonia in infants when the infection is passed from mother to baby during birth.Diagnosis of chlamydia by culturing tends to be difficult and slow. Because they are intracellular pathogens, theyrequire multiple passages through tissue culture. Recently, a variety of PCR- and serologically based tests have beendeveloped to enable easier identification of these pathogens. Tetracycline and macrolide antibiotics are typicallyprescribed for treatment.Health Care-Associated PneumoniaA variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals are commoncauses of health care-associated pneumonia. These include Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, andproteobacteria such as species of Escherichia, Proteus, and Serratia. Patients at risk include the elderly, those whohave other preexisting lung conditions, and those who are immunocompromised. In addition, patients receivingsupportive therapies such as intubation, antibiotics, and immunomodulatory drugs may also be at risk because theseinterventions disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defenses. Invasive medical devices such as974 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5catheters, medical implants, and ventilators can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia-causing pathogens into thebody.[7]Pneumonia caused by K. pneumoniae is characterized by lung necrosis and “currant jelly sputum,” so named becauseit consists of clumps of blood, mucus, and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produced by the bacterium. K.pneumoniae is often multidrug resistant. Aminoglycoside and cephalosporin are often prescribed but are not alwayseffective. Klebsiella pneumonia is frequently fatal even when treated.Pseudomonas PneumoniaPseudomonas aeruginosa is another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious cases of bacterial pneumoniain patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and hospitalized patients assisted with artificial ventilators. This bacteriumis extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxins. Ventilator-associated pneumonia with P.aeruginosa is caused by contaminated equipment that causes the pathogen to be aspirated into the lungs. In patientswith CF, a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor (CFTR) leads to the accumulation of excessdried mucus in the lungs. This decreases the effectiveness of the defensins and inhibits the mucociliary escalator. P.aeruginosa is known to infect more than half of all patients with CF. It adapts to the conditions in the patient’s lungsand begins to produce alginate, a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibits the mucociliary escalator. Lung damagefrom the chronic inflammatory response that ensues is the leading cause of mortality in patients with CF.[8]• What three pathogens are responsible for the most prevalent types of bacterial pneumonia?• Which cause of pneumonia is most likely to affect young people?• In what contexts does Pseudomonas aeruginosa cause pneumonia?Part 2John’s chest radiograph revealed an extensive consolidation in the right lung, and his sputum cultures revealedthe presence of a gram-negative rod. His physician prescribed a course of the antibiotic clarithromycin. He alsoordered the rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs) for type A and B influenza to rule out a possible underlyingviral infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, John’s condition continued to deteriorate, so he was admitted to thehospital.• What are some possible causes of pneumonia that would not have responded to the prescribedantibiotic?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.TuberculosisTuberculosis (TB) is one of the deadliest infectious diseases in human history. Although tuberculosis infection ratesin the United States are extremely low, the CDC estimates that about one-third of the world’s population is infectedClinical Focus7. SM Koenig et al. “Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 19 no. 4(2006):637–657.8. R. Sordé et al. “Management of Refractory Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infection in Cystic Fibrosis.” Infection and Drug Resistance 4(2011):31–41.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 975with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal organism of TB, with 9.6 million new TB cases and 1.5 million deathsworldwide in 2014.[9]M. tuberculosis is an acid-fast, high G + C, gram-positive, nonspore-forming rod. Its cell wall is rich in waxymycolic acids, which make the cells impervious to polar molecules. It also causes these organisms to grow slowly.M. tuberculosis causes a chronic granulomatous disease that can infect any area of the body, although it is typicallyassociated with the lungs. M. tuberculosis is spread by inhalation of respiratory droplets or aerosols from an infectedperson. The infectious dose of M. tuberculosis is only 10 cells.[10]After inhalation, the bacteria enter the alveoli (Figure 22.13). The cells are phagocytized by macrophages but cansurvive and multiply within these phagocytes because of the protection by the waxy mycolic acid in their cell walls.If not eliminated by macrophages, the infection can progress, causing an inflammatory response and an accumulationof neutrophils and macrophages in the area. Several weeks or months may pass before an immunological response ismounted by T cells and B cells. Eventually, the lesions in the alveoli become walled off, forming small round lesionscalled tubercles. Bacteria continue to be released into the center of the tubercles and the chronic immune responseresults in tissue damage and induction of apoptosis (programmed host-cell death) in a process called liquefaction.This creates a caseous center, or air pocket, where the aerobic M. tuberculosis can grow and multiply. Tubercles mayeventually rupture and bacterial cells can invade pulmonary capillaries; from there, bacteria can spread through thebloodstream to other organs, a condition known as miliary tuberculosis. The rupture of tubercles also facilitatestransmission of the bacteria to other individuals via droplet aerosols that exit the body in coughs. Because thesedroplets can be very small and stay aloft for a long time, special precautions are necessary when caring for patientswith TB, such as the use of face masks and negative-pressure ventilation and filtering systems.Eventually, most lesions heal to form calcified Ghon complexes. These structures are visible on chest radiographsand are a useful diagnostic feature. But even after the disease has apparently ended, viable bacteria remain sequesteredin these locations. Release of these organisms at a later time can produce reactivation tuberculosis (or secondaryTB). This is mainly observed in people with alcoholism, the elderly, or in otherwise immunocompromised individuals(Figure 22.13).9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tuberculosis (TB). Data and Statistics.” http://www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/default.htm10. D. Saini et al. “Ultra-Low Dose of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Aerosol Creates Partial Infection in Mice.” Tuberculosis 92 no. 2(2012):160–165.976 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.13 In the infectious cycle of tuberculosis, the immune response of most infected individuals(approximately 90%) results in the formation of tubercles in which the infection is walled off.[11] The remainder willsuffer progressive primary tuberculosis. The sequestered bacteria may be reactivated to form secondary tuberculosisin immunocompromised patients at a later time. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Because TB is a chronic disease, chemotherapeutic treatments often continue for months or years. Multidrug resistant(MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR-TB) strains of M. tuberculosis are a growing clinical concern. Thesestrains can arise due to misuse or mismanagement of antibiotic therapies. Therefore, it is imperative that proper11. G. Kaplan et al. “Mycobacterium tuberculosis Growth at the Cavity Surface: A Microenvironment with Failed Immunity.” Infection andImmunity 71 no.12 (2003):7099–7108.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 977multidrug protocols are used to treat these infections. Common antibiotics included in these mixtures are isoniazid,rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide.A TB vaccine is available that is based on the so-called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) strain of M. bovis commonlyfound in cattle. In the United States, the BCG vaccine is only given to health-care workers and members of themilitary who are at risk of exposure to active cases of TB. It is used more broadly worldwide. Many individuals bornin other countries have been vaccinated with BCG strain. BCG is used in many countries with a high prevalence ofTB, to prevent childhood tuberculous meningitis and miliary disease.The Mantoux tuberculin skin test (Figure 22.14) is regularly used in the United States to screen for potential TBexposure (see Hypersensitivities). However, prior vaccinations with the BCG vaccine can cause false-positiveresults. Chest radiographs to detect Ghon complex formation are required, therefore, to confirm exposure.Figure 22.14 (a) The Mantoux skin test for tuberculosis involves injecting the subject with tuberculin proteinderivative. The injection should initially produce a raised wheal. (b) The test should be read in 48–72 hours. A positiveresult is indicated by redness, swelling, or hardness; the size of the responding region is measured to determine thefinal result. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)These short animations (https://openstax.org/l/22mycotublegpnean) discussthe infection strategies of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Legionellapneumophila.• What characteristic of Mycobacterium tuberculosis allows it to evade the immune response?• What happens to cause miliary tuberculosis?• Explain the limitations of the Mantoux tuberculin skin test.Pertussis (Whooping Cough)The causative agent of pertussis, commonly called whooping cough, is Bordetella pertussis, a gram-negativecoccobacillus. The disease is characterized by mucus accumulation in the lungs that leads to a long period of severecoughing. Sometimes, following a bout of coughing, a sound resembling a “whoop” is produced as air is inhaledLink to Learning978 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5through the inflamed and restricted airway—hence the name whooping cough. Although adults can be infected, thesymptoms of this disease are most pronounced in infants and children. Pertussis is highly communicable throughdroplet transmission, so the uncontrollable coughing produced is an efficient means of transmitting the disease in asusceptible population.Following inhalation, B. pertussis specifically attaches to epithelial cells using an adhesin, filamentoushemagglutinin. The bacteria then grow at the site of infection and cause disease symptoms through the productionof exotoxins. One of the main virulence factors of this organism is an A-B exotoxin called the pertussis toxin (PT).When PT enters the host cells, it increases the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and disrupts cellularsignaling. PT is known to enhance inflammatory responses involving histamine and serotonin. In addition to PT, B.pertussis produces a tracheal cytotoxin that damages ciliated epithelial cells and results in accumulation of mucus inthe lungs. The mucus can support the colonization and growth of other microbes and, as a consequence, secondaryinfections are common. Together, the effects of these factors produce the cough that characterizes this infection.A pertussis infection can be divided into three distinct stages. The initial infection, termed the catarrhal stage, isrelatively mild and unremarkable. The signs and symptoms may include nasal congestion, a runny nose, sneezing,and a low-grade fever. This, however, is the stage in which B. pertussis is most infectious. In the paroxysmal stage,mucus accumulation leads to uncontrollable coughing spasms that can last for several minutes and frequently inducevomiting. The paroxysmal stage can last for several weeks. A long convalescence stage follows the paroxysmal stage,during which time patients experience a chronic cough that can last for up to several months. In fact, the disease issometimes called the 100-day cough.In infants, coughing can be forceful enough to cause fractures to the ribs, and prolonged infections can lead to death.The CDC reported 20 pertussis-related deaths in 2012,[12] but that number had declined to five by 2015.[13]During the first 2 weeks of infection, laboratory diagnosis is best performed by culturing the organism directly from anasopharyngeal (NP) specimen collected from the posterior nasopharynx. The NP specimen is streaked onto Bordet-Gengou medium. The specimens must be transported to the laboratory as quickly as possible, even if transport mediaare used. Transport times of longer than 24 hours reduce the viability of B. pertussis significantly.Within the first month of infection, B. pertussis can be diagnosed using PCR techniques. During the later stagesof infection, pertussis-specific antibodies can be immunologically detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay (ELISA).Pertussis is generally a self-limiting disease. Antibiotic therapy with erythromycin or tetracycline is only effectiveat the very earliest stages of disease. Antibiotics given later in the infection, and prophylactically to uninfectedindividuals, reduce the rate of transmission. Active vaccination is a better approach to control this disease. The DPTvaccine was once in common use in the United States. In that vaccine, the P component consisted of killed whole-cellB. pertussis preparations. Because of some adverse effects, that preparation has now been superseded by the DTaPand Tdap vaccines. In both of these new vaccines, the “aP” component is a pertussis toxoid.Widespread vaccination has greatly reduced the number of reported cases and prevented large epidemics of pertussis.Recently, however, pertussis has begun to reemerge as a childhood disease in some states because of decliningvaccination rates and an increasing population of susceptible children.12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2012 Final Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/downloads/pertuss-surv-report-2012.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Provisional Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/downloads/pertuss-surv-report-2015-provisional.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 979This web page (https://openstax.org/l/22pertussaudio) contains an audio clipof the distinctive “whooping” sound associated with pertussis in infants.This interactive map (https://openstax.org/l/22intmapprevacc) showsoutbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases, including pertussis, around theworld.• What accounts for the mucus production in a pertussis infection?• What are the signs and symptoms associated with the three stages of pertussis?• Why is pertussis becoming more common in the United States?Legionnaires DiseaseAn atypical pneumonia called Legionnaires disease (also known as legionellosis) is caused by an aerobic gramnegativebacillus, Legionella pneumophila. This bacterium infects free-living amoebae that inhabit moistenvironments, and infections typically occur from human-made reservoirs such as air-conditioning cooling towers,humidifiers, misting systems, and fountains. Aerosols from these reservoirs can lead to infections of susceptibleindividuals, especially those suffering from chronic heart or lung disease or other conditions that weaken the immunesystem.When L. pneumophila bacteria enter the alveoli, they are phagocytized by resident macrophages. However, L.pneumophila uses a secretion system to insert proteins in the endosomal membrane of the macrophage; these proteinsprevent lysosomal fusion, allowing L. pneumophila to continue to proliferate within the phagosome. The resultingrespiratory disease can range from mild to severe pneumonia, depending on the status of the host’s immune defenses.Although this disease primarily affects the lungs, it can also cause fever, nausea, vomiting, confusion, and otherneurological effects.Diagnosis of Legionnaires disease is somewhat complicated. L. pneumophila is a fastidious bacterium and is difficultto culture. In addition, since the bacterial cells are not efficiently stained with the Gram stain, other stainingtechniques, such as the Warthin-Starry silver-precipitate procedure, must be used to visualize this pathogen. A rapiddiagnostic test has been developed that detects the presence of Legionella antigen in a patient’s urine; results take lessthan 1 hour, and the test has high selectivity and specificity (greater than 90%). Unfortunately, the test only worksfor one serotype of L. pneumophila (type 1, the serotype responsible for most infections). Consequently, isolation andidentification of L. pneumophila from sputum remains the defining test for diagnosis.Once diagnosed, Legionnaire disease can be effectively treated with fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics.However, the disease is sometimes fatal; about 10% of patients die of complications.[14] There is currently no vaccineavailable.Link to Learning14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Legionella (Legionnaires’ Disease and Pontiac Fever: Diagnosis, Treatment, andComplications).” http://www.cdc.gov/legionella/about/diagnosis.html. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.980 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Why is Legionnaires disease associated with air-conditioning systems?• How does Legionella pneumophila circumvent the immune system?Q FeverThe zoonotic disease Q fever is caused by a rickettsia, Coxiella burnetii. The primary reservoirs for this bacteriumare domesticated livestock such as cattle, sheep, and goats. The bacterium may be transmitted by ticks or throughexposure to the urine, feces, milk, or amniotic fluid of an infected animal. In humans, the primary route of infectionis through inhalation of contaminated farmyard aerosols. It is, therefore, largely an occupational disease of farmers.Humans are acutely sensitive to C. burnetii—the infective dose is estimated to be just a few cells.[15] In addition, theorganism is hardy and can survive in a dry environment for an extended time. Symptoms associated with acute Qfever include high fever, headache, coughing, pneumonia, and general malaise. In a small number of patients (lessthan 5%[16]), the condition may become chronic, often leading to endocarditis, which may be fatal.Diagnosing rickettsial infection by cultivation in the laboratory is both difficult and hazardous because of the easyaerosolization of the bacteria, so PCR and ELISA are commonly used. Doxycycline is the first-line drug to treat acuteQ fever. In chronic Q fever, doxycycline is often paired with hydroxychloroquine.Bacterial Diseases of the Respiratory TractNumerous pathogens can cause infections of the respiratory tract. Many of these infections produce similarsigns and symptoms, but appropriate treatment depends on accurate diagnosis through laboratory testing. Thetables in Figure 22.15 and Figure 22.16 summarize the most important bacterial respiratory infections, withthe latter focusing specifically on forms of bacterial pneumonia.Disease Profile15. WD Tigertt et al. “Airborne Q Fever.” Bacteriological Reviews 25 no. 3 (1961):285–293.16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Q fever. Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment.” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/qfever/symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 6, 2016.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 981Figure 22.15982 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.16Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 98322.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases of the respiratory tractViruses are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections. Unlike the bacterial pathogens, we have feweffective therapies to combat viral respiratory infections. Fortunately, many of these diseases are mild and selflimiting.A few respiratory infections manifest their primary symptoms at other locations in the body.The Common ColdThe common cold is a generic term for a variety of mild viral infections of the nasal cavity. More than 200 differentviruses are known to cause the common cold. The most common groups of cold viruses include rhinoviruses,coronaviruses, and adenoviruses. These infections are widely disseminated in the human population and aretransmitted through direct contact and droplet transmission. Coughing and sneezing efficiently produce infectiousaerosols, and rhinoviruses are known to persist on environmental surfaces for up to a week.[17]Viral contact with the nasal mucosa or eyes can lead to infection. Rhinoviruses tend to replicate best between 33 °C(91.4 °F) and 35 °C (95 °F), somewhat below normal body temperature (37 °C [98.6 °F]). As a consequence, theytend to infect the cooler tissues of the nasal cavities. Colds are marked by an irritation of the mucosa that leads toan inflammatory response. This produces common signs and symptoms such as nasal excess nasal secretions (runnynose), congestion, sore throat, coughing, and sneezing. The absence of high fever is typically used to differentiatecommon colds from other viral infections, like influenza. Some colds may progress to cause otitis media, pharyngitis,or laryngitis, and patients may also experience headaches and body aches. The disease, however, is self-limiting andtypically resolves within 1–2 weeks.There are no effective antiviral treatments for the common cold and antibacterial drugs should not be prescribedunless secondary bacterial infections have been established. Many of the viruses that cause colds are related, soimmunity develops throughout life. Given the number of viruses that cause colds, however, individuals are neverlikely to develop immunity to all causes of the common cold.• How are colds transmitted?• What is responsible for the symptoms of a cold?Part 3Since antibiotic treatment had proven ineffective, John’s doctor suspects that a viral or fungal pathogen may bethe culprit behind John’s case of pneumonia. Another possibility is that John could have an antibiotic-resistantbacterial infection that will require a different antibiotic or combination of antibiotics to clear.The RIDT tests both came back negative for type A and type B influenza. However, the diagnostic laboratoryidentified the sputum isolate as Legionella pneumophila. The doctor ordered tests of John’s urine and, on theClinical Focus17. AG L’Huillier et al. “Survival of Rhinoviruses on Human Fingers.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 21, no. 4 (2015):381–385.984 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5second day after his admission, results of an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) were positive for the Legionellaantigen. John’s doctor added levofloxacin to his antibiotic therapy and continued to monitor him. The doctoralso began to ask John where he had been over the past 10 to 14 days.• Do negative RIDT results absolutely rule out influenza virus as the etiologic agent? Why or why not?• What is John’s prognosis?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.InfluenzaCommonly known as the flu, influenza is a common viral disease of the lower respiratory system caused by anorthomyxovirus. Influenza is pervasive worldwide and causes 3,000–50,000 deaths each year in the United States.The annual mortality rate can vary greatly depending on the virulence of the strain(s) responsible for seasonalepidemics. [18]Influenza infections are most typically characterized by fever, chills, and body aches. This is followed by symptomssimilar to the common cold that may last a week or more. Table 22.2 compares the signs and symptoms of influenzaand the common cold.Comparing the Common Cold and InfluenzaSign/Symptom Common Cold InfluenzaFever Low (37.2 °C [99 °F]) High (39 °C [102.2 °F])Headache Common CommonAches and pains Mild SevereFatigue Slight SevereNasal congestion Common RareSneezing Common RareTable 22.2In general, influenza is self-limiting. However, serious cases can lead to pneumonia and other complications that canbe fatal. Such cases are more common in the very young and the elderly; however, certain strains of influenza virus(like the 1918–1919 variant discussed later in this chapter) are more lethal to young adults than to the very young orold. Strains that affect young adults are believed to involve a cytokine storm—a positive feedback loop that formsbetween cytokine production and leukocytes. This cytokine storm produces an acute inflammatory response that leadsto rapid fluid accumulation in the lungs, culminating in pulmonary failure. In such cases, the ability to mount avigorous immune response is actually detrimental to the patient. The very young and very old are less susceptible tothis effect because their immune systems are less robust.A complication of influenza that occurs primarily in children and teenagers is Reye syndrome. This sequela causesswelling in the liver and brain, and may progress to neurological damage, coma, or death. Reye syndrome may followother viral infections, like chickenpox, and has been associated with the use of aspirin. For this reason, the CDC andother agencies recommend that aspirin and products containing aspirin never be used to treat viral illnesses in childrenyounger than age 19 years.[19]18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Estimating Seasonal Influenza-Associated Deaths in the United States: CDC StudyConfirms Variability of Flu.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/us_flu-related_deaths.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 985The influenza virus is primarily transmitted by direct contact and inhalation of aerosols. The RNA genome of thisvirus exists as seven or eight segments, each coated with ribonucleoprotein and encoding one or two specific viralproteins. The influenza virus is surrounded by a lipid membrane envelope, and two of the main antigens of theinfluenza virus are the spike proteins hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N), as shown in Figure 22.17. Thesespike proteins play important roles in the viral infectious cycle.Figure 22.17 The illustration shows the structure of an influenza virus. The viral envelope is studded with copies ofthe proteins neuraminidase and hemagglutinin, and surrounds the individual seven or eight RNA genome segments.(credit: modification of work by Dan Higgins, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Following inhalation, the influenza virus uses the hemagglutinin protein to bind to sialic acid receptors on hostrespiratory epithelial cells. This facilitates endocytosis of the viral particle. Once inside the host cell, the negativestrand viral RNA is replicated by the viral RNA polymerase to form mRNA, which is translated by the host to produceviral proteins. Additional viral RNA molecules are transcribed to produce viral genomic RNA, which assemble withviral proteins to form mature virions. Release of the virions from the host cell is facilitated by viral neuraminidase,which cleaves sialic-acid receptors to allow progeny viruses to make a clean exit when budding from an infected cell.There are three genetically related influenza viruses, called A, B, and C. The influenza A viruses have differentsubtypes based on the structure of their hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. There are currently 18 knownsubtypes of hemagglutinin and 11 known subtypes of neuraminidase. Influenza viruses are serologically characterizedby the type of H and N proteins that they possess. Of the nearly 200 different combinations of H and N, only a few,such as the H1N1 strain, are associated with human disease. The influenza viruses A, B, and C make up three ofthe five major groups of orthomyxoviruses. The differences between the three types of influenza are summarizedin Table 22.3. The most virulent group is the influenza A viruses, which cause seasonal pandemics of influenzaeach year. Influenza A virus can infect a variety of animals, including pigs, horses, pigs, and even whales anddolphins. Influenza B virus is less virulent and is sometimes associated with epidemic outbreaks. Influenza C virusgenerally produces the mildest disease symptoms and is rarely connected with epidemics. Neither influenza B virusnor influenza C virus has significant animal reservoirs.The Three Major Groups of Influenza VirusesInfluenza A virus Influenza B virus Influenza C virusSeverity Severe Moderate MildTable 22.319. ED Belay et al. “Reye’s Syndrome in the United States From 1981 Through 1997.” New England Journal of Medicine 340 no. 18(1999):1377–1382.986 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The Three Major Groups of Influenza VirusesInfluenza A virus Influenza B virus Influenza C virusAnimal reservoir Yes No NoGenome segments 8 8 7Population spread Epidemic and pandemic Epidemic SporadicAntigenic variation Shift/drift Drift DriftTable 22.3Influenza virus infections elicit a strong immune response, particularly to the hemagglutinin protein, which wouldprotect the individual if they encountered the same virus. Unfortunately, the antigenic properties of the virus changerelatively rapidly, so new strains are evolving that immune systems previously challenged by influenza virus cannotrecognize. When an influenza virus gains a new hemagglutinin or neuraminidase type, it is able to evade the host’simmune response and be successfully transmitted, often leading to an epidemic.There are two mechanisms by which these evolutionary changes may occur. The mechanisms of antigen drift andantigenic shift for influenza virus have been described in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens.Of these two genetic processes, it is viruses produced by antigenic shift that have the potential to be extremely virulentbecause individuals previously infected by other strains are unlikely to produce any protective immune responseagainst these novel variants.The most lethal influenza pandemic in recorded history occurred from 1918 through 1919. Near the end of WorldWar I, an antigenic shift involving the recombination of avian and human viruses is thought to have produced a newH1N1 virus. This strain rapidly spread worldwide and is commonly claimed to have killed as many as 40 millionto 50 million people—more than double the number killed in the war. Although referred to as the Spanish flu, thisdisease is thought to have originated in the United States. Regardless of its source, the conditions of World War Igreatly contributed to the spread of this disease. Crowding, poor sanitation, and rapid mobilization of large numbersof personnel and animals facilitated the dissemination of the new virus once it appeared.Several of the most important influenza pandemics of modern times have been associated with antigenic shifts. A fewof these are summarized in Table 22.4.Historical Influenza Outbreaks[20][21][22]Years Common Name Serotype Estimated Number of Deaths1918–1919 Spanish flu H1N1 20,000,000–40,000,0001957–1958 Asian flu N2N2 1,000,000–2,000,0001968–1969 Hong Kong flu H3N2 1,000,000–3,000,0002009–2010 Swine flu H1N1/09 152,000–575,000Table 22.4Laboratory diagnosis of influenza is typically performed using a variety of RIDTs. These tests are inoculated bypoint-of-care personnel and give results within 15–20 minutes. Unfortunately, these tests have variable sensitivity andcommonly yield false-negative results. Other tests include hemagglutination of erythrocytes (due to hemagglutinin20. CE Mills et al. “Transmissibility of 1918 Pandemic Influenza.” Nature 432, no. 7019 (2004):904–906.21. E. Tognotti. “Influenza Pandemics: A Historical Retrospect.” Journal of Infection in Developing Countries 3, no. 5 (2009):331–334.22. FS Dawood et al. “Estimated Global Mortality Associated with the First 12 Months of 2009 Pandemic Influenza A H1N1 VirusCirculation: A Modelling Study.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 12, no. 9 (2012):687–695.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 987action) or complement fixation. Patient serum antibodies against influenza viruses can also be detected in bloodsamples. Because influenza is self-limiting disease, diagnosis through these more time-consuming and expensivemethods is not typically used.Three drugs that inhibit influenza neuraminidase activity are available: inhaled zanamivir, oral oseltamivir, andintravenous peramivir. If taken at the onset of symptoms, these drugs can shorten the course of the disease. Thesedrugs are thought to impair the ability of the virus to efficiently exit infected host cells. A more effective meansof controlling influenza outbreaks, though, is vaccination. Every year, new influenza vaccines are developed to beeffective against the strains expected to be predominant. This is determined in February by a review of the dominantstrains around the world from a network of reporting sites; their reports are used to generate a recommendation for thevaccine combination for the following winter in the northern hemisphere. In September, a similar recommendationis made for the winter in the southern hemisphere.[23] These recommendations are used by vaccine manufacturers toformulate each year’s vaccine. In most cases, three or four viruses are selected—the two most prevalent influenza Astrains and one or two influenza B strains. The chosen strains are typically cultivated in eggs and used to produceeither an inactivated or a live attenuated vaccine (e.g., FluMist). For individuals 18 years or older with an allergyto egg products, a recombinant egg-free trivalent vaccine is available. Most of the influenza vaccines over the pastdecade have had an effectiveness of about 50%.[24]Flu PandemicDuring the spring of 2013, a new strain of H7N9 influenza was reported in China. A total of 132 people wereinfected. Of those infected, 44 (33%) died. A genetic analysis of the virus suggested that this strain arosefrom the reassortment of three different influenza viruses: a domestic duck H7N3 virus, a wild bird H7N9virus, and a domestic poultry H9N2 virus. The virus was detected in the Chinese domestic bird flocks andcontact with this reservoir is thought to have been the primary source of infection. This strain of influenzawas not able to spread from person to person. Therefore, the disease did not become a global problem. Thiscase does, though, illustrate the potential threat that influenza still represents. If a strain like the H7N9 viruswere to undergo another antigenic shift, it could become more communicable in the human population. Witha mortality rate of 33%, such a pandemic would be disastrous. For this reason, organizations like the WorldHealth Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention keep all known influenza outbreaksunder constant surveillance.• Compare the severity of the three types of influenza viruses.• Why must new influenza vaccines be developed each year?Viral PneumoniaViruses cause fewer cases of pneumonia than bacteria; however, several viruses can lead to pneumonia in children andthe elderly. The most common sources of viral pneumonia are adenoviruses, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses,and respiratory syncytial viruses. The signs and symptoms produced by these viruses can range from mild cold-likeCase in Point23. World Health Organization. “WHO Report on Global Surveillance of Epidemic-Prone Infectious Diseases.” 2000. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/surveillance/Influenza.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.24. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. “Vaccine Effectiveness - How Well Does the Flu Vaccine Work?” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/qa/vaccineeffect.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.988 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5symptoms to severe cases of pneumonia, depending on the virulence of the virus strain and the strength of the hostdefenses of the infected individual. Occasionally, infections can result in otitis media.Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections are fairly common in infants; most people have been infected by the ageof 2 years. During infection, a viral surface protein causes host cells to fuse and form multinucleated giant cells calledsyncytia. There are no specific antiviral therapies or vaccines available for viral pneumonia. In adults, these infectionsare self-limiting, resemble the common cold, and tend to resolve uneventfully within 1 or 2 weeks. Infections ininfants, however, can be life-threatening. RSV is highly contagious and can be spread through respiratory dropletsfrom coughing and sneezing. RSV can also survive for a long time on environmental surfaces and, thus, be transmittedindirectly via fomites.• Who is most likely to contract viral pneumonia?• What is the recommended treatment for viral pneumonia?SARS and MERSSevere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) are two acute respiratoryinfections caused by coronaviruses. In both cases, these are thought to be zoonotic infections. Bats and civet cats arethought to have been the reservoirs for SARS; camels seem to be the reservoir for MERS.SARS originated in southern China in the winter of 2002 and rapidly spread to 37 countries.Within about 1 year, morethan 8,000 people experienced influenza-like symptoms and nearly 800 people died. The rapid spread and severity ofthese infections caused grave concern at the time. However, the outbreak was controlled in 2003 and no further casesof SARS have been recorded since 2004.[25] Signs and symptoms of SARS include high fever, headache, body aches,and cough, and most patients will develop pneumonia.MERS was first reported in Saudi Arabia in 2013. Although some infected individuals will be asymptomatic or havemild cold-like symptoms, most will develop a high fever, aches, cough and a severe respiratory infection that canprogress to pneumonia. As of 2015, over 1,300 people in 27 countries have been infected. About 500 people havedied. There are no specific treatments for either MERS or SARS. In addition, no vaccines are currently available.Several recombinant vaccines, however, are being developed.• What is the cause of SARS?• What are the signs and symptoms of MERS?Viral Respiratory Diseases Causing Skin RashesMeasles, rubella (German measles), and chickenpox are three important viral diseases often associated with skinrashes. However, their symptoms are systemic, and because their portal of entry is the respiratory tract, they can beconsidered respiratory infections.25. Y. Huang. “The SARS Epidemic and Its Aftermath in China: A Political Perspective.” In Learning from SARS: Preparing for the NextDisease Outbreak. Edited by S. Knobler et al. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK92479/Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 989Measles (Rubeola)The measles virus (MeV) causes the highly contagious disease measles, also known as rubeola, which is a majorcause of childhood mortality worldwide. Although vaccination efforts have greatly reduced the incidence of measlesin much of the world, epidemics are still common in unvaccinated populations in certain countries.[26]The measles virus is a single-stranded, negative-strand RNA virus and, like the influenza virus, it possesses anenvelope with spikes of embedded hemagglutinin. The infection is spread by direct contact with infectious secretionsor inhalation of airborne droplets spread by breathing, coughing, or sneezing. Measles is initially characterized by ahigh fever, conjunctivitis, and a sore throat. The virus then moves systemically through the bloodstream and causesa characteristic rash. The measles rash initially forms on the face and later spreads to the extremities. The red, raisedmacular rash will eventually become confluent and can last for several days. At the same time, extremely high fevers(higher than 40.6 °C [105 °F]) can occur. Another diagnostic sign of measles infections is Koplik’s spots, white spotsthat form on the inner lining of inflamed cheek tissues (Figure 22.18).Figure 22.18 (a) Measles typically presents as a raised macular rash that begins on the face and spreads to theextremities. (b) Koplik’s spots on the oral mucosa are also characteristic of measles. (c) A thin-section transmissionelectron micrograph of a measles virion. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Although measles is usually self-limiting, it can lead to pneumonia, encephalitis, and death. In addition, the inhibitionof immune system cells by the measles virus predisposes patients to secondary infections. In severe infections withhighly virulent strains, measles fatality rates can be as high as 10% to 15%. There were more than 145,000 measlesdeaths (mostly young children) worldwide in 2013.[27]The preliminary diagnosis of measles is typically based on the appearance of the rash and Koplik’s spots.Hemagglutination inhibition tests and serological tests may be used to confirm measles infections in low-prevalencesettings.There are no effective treatments for measles. Vaccination is widespread in developed countries as part of the measles,mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine. As a result, there are typically fewer than 200 cases of measles in the UnitedStates annually.[28] When it is seen, it is often associated with children who have not been vaccinated.26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Global Health - Measles, Rubella, and CRS, Eliminating Measles, Rubella & CongenitalRubella Syndrome (CRS) Worldwide.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/measles/. Accessed July 7, 2016.27. World Health Organization. “Measles Factsheet.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/. Accessed July 7, 2016.28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Measles Cases and Outbreaks.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks.html.Accessed July 7, 2016.990 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Preventable Measles OutbreaksIn December 2014, a measles epidemic began at Disneyland in southern California. Within just 4 months,this outbreak affected 134 people in 24 states.[29] Characterization of the virus suggests that an unidentifiedinfected individual brought the disease to the United States from the Philippines, where a similar virus hadsickened more than 58,000 people and killed 110.[30] Measles is highly communicable, and its spread atDisneyland may have been facilitated by the low vaccination rate in some communities in California.[31]Several factors could conceivably lead to a strong comeback of measles in the U.S. Measles is still anepidemic disease in many locations worldwide. Air travel enables infected individuals to rapidly translocatethese infections globally. Compounding this problem, low vaccination rates in some local areas in the UnitedStates (such as in Amish communities) provide populations of susceptible hosts for the virus to establishitself. Finally, measles has been a low-prevalence infection in the U.S. for some time. As a consequence,physicians are not as likely to recognize the initial symptoms and make accurate diagnoses. Until vaccinationrates become high enough to ensure herd immunity, measles is likely to be an ongoing problem in the UnitedStates.Rubella (German Measles)Rubella, or the German measles, is a relatively mild viral disease that produces a rash somewhat like that caused bythe measles, even though the two diseases are unrelated. The rubella virus is an enveloped RNA virus that can befound in the respiratory tract. It is transmitted from person to person in aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing.Nearly half of all infected people remain asymptomatic. However, the virus is shed and spread by asymptomaticcarriers. Like rubeola, rubella begins with a facial rash that spreads to the extremities (Figure 22.19). However, therash is less intense, shorter lived (2–3 days), not associated with Koplik’s spots, and the resulting fever is lower (101°F [38.3 °C]).Congenital rubella syndrome is the most severe clinical complication of the German measles. This occurs if a womanis infected with rubella during pregnancy. The rubella virus is teratogenic, meaning it can cause developmentaldefects if it crosses the placenta during pregnancy. There is a very high incidence of stillbirth, spontaneous abortion,or congenital birth defects if the mother is infected before 11 weeks of pregnancy and 35% if she is infected betweenweeks 13–16; after this time the incidence is low.[32] For this reason, prenatal screening for rubella is commonlypracticed in the United States. Postnatal infections are usually self-limiting and rarely cause severe complications.Like measles, the preliminary diagnosis of rubella is based on the patient’s history, vaccination records, and theappearance of the rash. The diagnosis can be confirmed by hemagglutinin inhibition assays and a variety of otherimmunological techniques. There are no antiviral therapies for rubella, but an effective vaccine (MMR) is widelyavailable. Vaccination efforts have essentially eliminated rubella in the United States; fewer than a dozen cases arereported in a typical year.Micro Connections29. Ibid.30. World Health Organization. “Measles-Rubella Bulletin.” Manila, Philippines; Expanded Programme on Immunization Regional Officefor the Western Pacific World Health Organization; 9 no. 1 (2015). http://www.wpro.who.int/immunization/documents/mrbulletinvol9issue1.pdf31. M. Bloch et al. “Vaccination Rates for Every Kindergartener in California.” The New York Times February 6, 2015.http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/02/06/us/california-measles-vaccines-map.html?_r=1. Accessed July 7, 2016.32. E. Miller et al. “Consequences of Confirmed Maternal Rubella at Successive Stages of Pregnancy.” The Lancet 320, no. 8302(1982):781–784.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 991Figure 22.19 (a) This photograph shows the appearance of the German measles (rubella) rash. Note that this isless intense than the rash of measles and the lesions are not confluent. (b) This transmission electron micrographshows rubella virus virions just budding from a host cell. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Chickenpox and ShinglesChickenpox, also known as varicella, was once a common viral childhood disease. The causative agent ofchickenpox, the varicella-zoster virus, is a member of the herpesvirus family. In children, the disease is mild and selflimiting,and is easily transmitted by direct contact or inhalation of material from the skin lesions. In adults, however,chickenpox infections can be much more severe and can lead to pneumonia and birth defects in the case of infectedpregnant women. Reye syndrome, mentioned earlier in this chapter, is also a serious complication associated withchickenpox, generally in children.Once infected, most individuals acquire a lifetime immunity to future chickenpox outbreaks. For this reason, parentsonce held “chickenpox parties” for their children. At these events, uninfected children were intentionally exposed toan infected individual so they would contract the disease earlier in life, when the incidence of complications is verylow, rather than risk a more severe infection later.After the initial viral exposure, chickenpox has an incubation period of about 2 weeks. The initial infection of therespiratory tract leads to viremia and eventually produces fever and chills. A pustular rash then develops on the face,progresses to the trunk, and then the extremities, although most form on the trunk (Figure 22.20). Eventually, thelesions burst and form a crusty scab. Individuals with chickenpox are infectious from about 2 days before the outbreakof the rash until all the lesions have scabbed over.992 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 22.20 (a) The characteristic appearance of the pustular chickenpox rash is concentrated on the trunk region.(b) This transmission electron micrograph shows a viroid of human herpesvirus 3, the virus that causes chickenpox inchildren and shingles when it is reactivated in adults. (credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Controland Prevention)Like other herpesviruses, the varicella-zoster virus can become dormant in nerve cells. While the pustular vesiclesare developing, the virus moves along sensory nerves to the dorsal ganglia in the spinal cord. Once there, thevaricella-zoster virus can remain latent for decades. These dormant viruses may be reactivated later in life by avariety of stimuli, including stress, aging, and immunosuppression. Once reactivated, the virus moves along sensorynerves to the skin of the face or trunk. This results in the production of the painful lesions in a condition known asshingles (Figure 22.21). These symptoms generally last for 2–6 weeks, and may recur more than once. Postherpeticneuralgia, pain signals sent from damaged nerves long after the other symptoms have subsided, is also possible. Inaddition, the virus can spread to other organs in immunocompromised individuals. A person with shingles lesionscan transmit the virus to a nonimmune contact, and the newly infected individual would develop chickenpox as theprimary infection. Shingles cannot be transmitted from one person to another.The primary diagnosis of chickenpox in children is mainly based on the presentation of a pustular rash of the trunk.Serological and PCR-based tests are available to confirm the initial diagnosis. Treatment for chickenpox infections inchildren is usually not required. In patients with shingles, acyclovir treatment can often reduce the severity and lengthof symptoms, and diminish the risk of postherpetic neuralgia. An effective vaccine is now available for chickenpox.A vaccine is also available for adults older than 60 years who were infected with chickenpox in their youth. Thisvaccine reduces the likelihood of a shingles outbreak by boosting the immune defenses that are keeping the latentinfection in check and preventing reactivation.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 993Figure 22.21 (a) An individual suffering from shingles. (b) The rash is formed because of the reactivation of avaricella-zoster infection that was initially contracted in childhood. (credit a: modification of work by National Instituteof Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID); credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)• Why does measles often lead to secondary infections?• What signs or symptoms would distinguish rubella and measles?• Why can chickenpox lead to shingles later in life?Smallpox StockpilesSmallpox has probably killed more humans than any other infectious disease, with the possible exception oftuberculosis. This disease, caused by the variola major virus, is transmitted by inhalation of viral particles shedfrom lesions in the throat. The smallpox virus spreads systemically in the bloodstream and produces a pustularskin rash. Historical epidemics of smallpox had fatality rates of 50% or greater in susceptible populations.Concerted worldwide vaccination efforts eradicated smallpox from the general population in 1977. This wasthe first microbial disease in history to be eradicated, a feat made possible by the fact that the only reservoirfor the smallpox virus is infected humans.Although the virus is no longer present in the wild, laboratory samples of the virus still exist in the United Statesand Russia.[33] The question is, why do these samples still exist? Some claim that these stocks should bemaintained for research purposes. Should the smallpox virus ever reappear, they say, we would need accessto such stocks for development of vaccines and treatments. Concerns about a re-emergence of the virus arenot totally unfounded. Although there are no living reservoirs of the virus, there is always the possibility thatsmallpox could re-emerge from mummified human bodies or human remains preserved in permafrost. It isalso possible that there are as-yet undiscovered samples of the virus in other locations around the world.Eye on Ethics994 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5An example of such "lost" samples was discovered in a drawer in a Food and Drug Administration lab inMaryland.[34] If an outbreak from such a source were to occur, it could lead to uncontrolled epidemics, sincethe population is largely unvaccinated now.Critics of this argument, including many research scientists and the World Health Organization, claim that thereis no longer any rational argument for keeping the samples. They view the “re-emergence scenarios” as athinly veiled pretense for harboring biological weapons. These scenarios, they say, are less probable than anintentional reintroduction of the virus from militarized stocks by humans. Furthermore, they point out that if weneeded to research smallpox in the future, we could rebuild the virus from its DNA sequence.What do you think? Are there legitimate arguments for maintaining stockpiles of smallpox, or should all formsof this deadly disease be eradicated?Viral Infections of the Respiratory TractMany viruses are capable of entering and causing disease in the respiratory system, and a number are ableto spread beyond the respiratory system to cause systemic infections. Most of these infections are highlycontagious and, with a few exceptions, antimicrobial drugs are not effective for treatment. Although some ofthese infections are self-limiting, others can have serious or fatal complications. Effective vaccines have beendeveloped for several of these diseases, as summarized in Figure 22.22.Disease Profile33. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “CDC Media Statement on Newly Discovered Smallpox Specimens.” July 8, 2014.http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/s0708-nih.html. Accessed on July 7, 2016.34. Ibid.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 995Figure 22.22996 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.522.4 Respiratory MycosesLearning Objectives• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the respiratory tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases of the respiratory tractFungal pathogens are ubiquitous in the environment. Serological studies have demonstrated that most people havebeen exposed to fungal respiratory pathogens during their lives. Yet symptomatic infections by these microbes arerare in healthy individuals. This demonstrates the efficacy of the defenses of our respiratory system. In this section,we will examine some of the fungi that can cause respiratory infections.HistoplasmosisHistoplasmosis is a fungal disease of the respiratory system and most commonly occurs in the Mississippi Valleyof the United States and in parts of Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and Australia. The causative agent,Histoplasma capsulatum, is a dimorphic fungus. This microbe grows as a filamentous mold in the environment butoccurs as a budding yeast during human infections. The primary reservoir for this pathogen is soil, particularly inlocations rich in bat or bird feces.Histoplasmosis is acquired by inhaling microconidial spores in the air; this disease is not transmitted from humanto human. The incidence of histoplasmosis exposure is high in endemic areas, with 60%–90% of the populationhaving anti-Histoplasma antibodies, depending on location;[35] however, relatively few individuals exposed to thefungus actually experience symptoms. Those most likely to be affected are the very young, the elderly, andimmunocompromised people.In many ways, the course of this disease is similar to that of tuberculosis. Following inhalation, the spores enterthe lungs and are phagocytized by alveolar macrophages. The fungal cells then survive and multiply within thesephagocytes (see Figure 5.26). Focal infections cause the formation of granulomatous lesions, which can lead tocalcifications that resemble the Ghon complexes of tuberculosis, even in asymptomatic cases. Also like tuberculosis,histoplasmosis can become chronic and reactivation can occur, along with dissemination to other areas of the body(e.g., the liver or spleen).Signs and symptoms of pulmonary histoplasmosis include fever, headache, and weakness with some chest discomfort.The initial diagnosis is often based on chest radiographs and cultures grown on fungal selective media likeSabouraud's dextrose agar. Direct fluorescence antibody staining and Giemsa staining can also be used to detect thispathogen. In addition, serological tests including a complement fixation assay and histoplasmin sensitivity can beused to confirm the diagnosis. In most cases, these infections are self-limiting and antifungal therapy is not required.However, in disseminated disease, the antifungal agents amphotericin B and ketoconazole are effective; itraconazolemay be effective in immunocompromised patients, in whom the disease can be more serious.• In what environments is one more likely to be infected with histoplasmosis?• Identify at least two similarities between histoplasmosis and tuberculosis.CoccidioidomycosisInfection by the dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immitis causes coccidioidomycosis. Because the microbe is endemicto the San Joaquin Valley of California, the disease is sometimes referred to as Valley fever. A related species that35. NE Manos et al. “Geographic Variation in the Prevalence of Histoplasmin Sensitivity.” Dis Chest 29, no. 6 (1956):649–668.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 997causes similar infections is found in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States, Mexico, and Centraland South America.[36]Like histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis is acquired by inhaling fungal spores—in this case, arthrospores formedby hyphal fragmentation. Once in the body, the fungus differentiates into spherules that are filled with endospores.Most C. immitis infections are asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, the infection can be very serious forimmunocompromised patients. The endospores may be transported in the blood, disseminating the infection andleading to the formation of granulomatous lesions on the face and nose (Figure 22.23). In severe cases, other majororgans can become infected, leading to serious complications such as fatal meningitis.Coccidioidomycosis can be diagnosed by culturing clinical samples. C. immitis readily grows on laboratory fungalmedia, such as Sabouraud's dextrose agar, at 35 °C (95 °F). Culturing the fungus, however, is rather dangerous. C.immitis is one of the most infectious fungal pathogens known and is capable of causing laboratory-acquired infections.Indeed, until 2012, this organism was considered a “select agent” of bioterrorism and classified as a BSL-3 microbe.Serological tests for antibody production are more often used for diagnosis. Although mild cases generally do notrequire intervention, disseminated infections can be treated with intravenous antifungal drugs like amphotericin B.Figure 22.23 (a) This patient has extensive facial lesions due to a disseminated Coccidioides infection. (b) Thisfluorescent micrograph depicts a spherule of C. immitis containing endospores. (credit a, b: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)ResolutionJohn’s negative RIDT tests do not rule out influenza, since false-negative results are common, but theLegionella infection still must be treated with antibiotic therapy and is the more serious condition. John'sprognosis is good, provided the physician can find an antibiotic therapy to which the infection responds.While John was undergoing treatment, three of the employees from the home improvement store also reportedto the clinic with very similar symptoms. All three were older than 55 years and had Legionella antigen in theirurine; L. pneumophila was also isolated from their sputum. A team from the health department was sent to thehome improvement store to identify a probable source for these infections. Their investigation revealed thatabout 3 weeks earlier, the store's air conditioning system, which was located where the employees ate lunch,Clinical Focus36. DR Hospenthal. “Coccioidomycosis.” Medscape. 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/215978-overview. Accessed July 7,2016.998 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5had been undergoing maintenance. L. pneumophila was isolated from the cooling coils of the air conditioningsystem and intracellular L. pneumophila was observed in amoebae in samples of condensed water from thecooling coils as well (Figure 22.24). The amoebae provide protection for the Legionella bacteria and are knownto enhance their pathogenicity.[37]In the wake of the infections, the store ordered a comprehensive cleaning of the air conditioning system andimplemented a regular maintenance program to prevent the growth of biofilms within the cooling tower. Theyalso reviewed practices at their other facilities.After a month of rest at home, John recovered from his infection enough to return to work, as did the otherthree employees of the store. However, John experienced lethargy and joint pain for more than a year after histreatment.Figure 22.24 Legionella pneumophila (red intracellular rods) infecting amoebae from a contaminated watersample. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.BlastomycosisBlastomycosis is a rare disease caused by another dimorphic fungus, Blastomyces dermatitidis. Like Histoplasmaand Coccidioides, Blastomyces uses the soil as a reservoir, and fungal spores can be inhaled from disturbed soil.The pulmonary form of blastomycosis generally causes mild flu-like symptoms and is self-limiting. It can, however,become disseminated in immunocompromised people, leading to chronic cutaneous disease with subcutaneouslesions on the face and hands (Figure 22.25). These skin lesions eventually become crusty and discolored and canresult in deforming scars. Systemic blastomycosis is rare, but if left untreated, it is always fatal.Preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary blastomycosis can be made by observing the characteristic budding yeast formsin sputum samples. Commercially available urine antigen tests are now also available. Additional confirmatorytests include serological assays such as immunodiffusion tests or EIA. Most cases of blastomycosis respond well toamphotericin B or ketoconazole treatments.37. HY Lau and NJ Ashbolt. “The Role of Biofilms and Protozoa in Legionella Pathogenesis: Implications for Drinking Water.” Journal ofApplied Microbiology 107 no. 2 (2009):368–378.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 999Figure 22.25 (a) These skin lesions are the result of disseminated cutaneous blastomycosis. (b) A differentialinterference contrast micrograph of B. dermatitidis yeast cultured on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)Watch this profile (https://openstax.org/l/22blastlunginf) of a blastomycosislung infection.MucormycosisA variety of fungi in the order Mucorales cause mucormycosis, a rare fungal disease. These include bread molds,like Rhizopus and Mucor; the most commonly associated species is Rhizopus arrhizus (oryzae) (see Figure 5.28).These fungi can colonize many different tissues in immunocompromised patients, but often infect the skin, sinuses,or the lungs.Although most people are regularly exposed to the causative agents of mucormycosis, infections in healthyindividuals are rare. Exposure to spores from the environment typically occurs through inhalation, but the spores canalso infect the skin through a wound or the gastrointestinal tract if ingested. Respiratory mucormycosis primarilyaffects immunocompromised individuals, such as patients with cancer or those who have had a transplant.[38]After the spores are inhaled, the fungi grow by extending hyphae into the host’s tissues. Infections can occur in boththe upper and lower respiratory tracts. Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is an infection of the sinuses and brain; symptomsinclude headache, fever, facial swelling, congestion, and tissue necrosis causing black lesions in the oral cavity.Pulmonary mucormycosis is an infection of the lungs; symptoms include fever, cough, chest pain, and shortness ofLink to Learning38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Definition of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/mucormycosis/definition.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.1000 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5breath. In severe cases, infections may become disseminated and involve the central nervous system, leading to comaand death.[39]Diagnosing mucormycosis can be challenging. Currently, there are no serological or PCR-based tests available toidentify these infections. Tissue biopsy specimens must be examined for the presence of the fungal pathogens. Thecausative agents, however, are often difficult to distinguish from other filamentous fungi. Infections are typicallytreated by the intravenous administration of amphotericin B, and superficial infections are removed by surgicaldebridement. Since the patients are often immunocompromised, viral and bacterial secondary infections commonlydevelop. Mortality rates vary depending on the site of the infection, the causative fungus, and other factors, but arecent study found an overall mortality rate of 54%.[40]• Compare the modes of transmission for coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and mucormycosis.• In general, which are more serious: the pulmonary or disseminated forms of these infections?AspergillosisAspergillus is a common filamentous fungus found in soils and organic debris. Nearly everyone has been exposedto this mold, yet very few people become sick. In immunocompromised patients, however, Aspergillus may becomeestablished and cause aspergillosis. Inhalation of spores can lead to asthma-like allergic reactions. The symptomscommonly include shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, runny nose, and headaches. Fungal balls, oraspergilloma, can form when hyphal colonies collect in the lungs (Figure 22.26). The fungal hyphae can invade thehost tissues, leading to pulmonary hemorrhage and a bloody cough. In severe cases, the disease may progress to adisseminated form that is often fatal. Death most often results from pneumonia or brain hemorrhages.Laboratory diagnosis typically requires chest radiographs and a microscopic examination of tissue and respiratoryfluid samples. Serological tests are available to identify Aspergillus antigens. In addition, a skin test can be performedto determine if the patient has been exposed to the fungus. This test is similar to the Mantoux tuberculin skintest used for tuberculosis. Aspergillosis is treated with intravenous antifungal agents, including itraconazole andvoriconazole. Allergic symptoms can be managed with corticosteroids because these drugs suppress the immunesystem and reduce inflammation. However, in disseminated infections, corticosteroids must be discontinued to allowa protective immune response to occur.39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Symptoms of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/mucormycosis/symptoms.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.40. MM Roden et al. “Epidemiology and Outcome of Zygomycosis: A Review of 929 Reported Cases.” Clinical Infectious Diseases 41 no.5 (2005):634–653.Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 1001Figure 22.26 A fungal ball can be observed in the upper lobe of the right lung in this chest radiograph of a patientwith aspergilloma. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Pneumocystis PneumoniaA type of pneumonia called Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii. Once thoughtto be a protozoan, this organism was formerly named P. carinii but it has been reclassified as a fungus andrenamed based on biochemical and genetic analyses. Pneumocystis is a leading cause of pneumonia in patients withacquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and can be seen in other compromised patients and premature infants.Respiratory infection leads to fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Diagnosis of these infections can be difficult.The organism is typically identified by microscopic examination of tissue and fluid samples from the lungs (Figure22.27). A PCR-based test is available to detect P. jirovecii in asymptomatic patients with AIDS. The best treatmentfor these infections is the combination drug trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMZ). These sulfa drugs oftenhave adverse effects, but the benefits outweigh these risks. Left untreated, PCP infections are often fatal.Figure 22.27 A light micrograph of a smear containing Pneumocystis jirovecii (dark purple cells) obtained fromhuman lung tissue and stained with toluidine blue. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)CryptococcosisInfection by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans causes cryptococcosis. This fungus is ubiquitous in the1002 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5soil and can be isolated from bird feces. Immunocompromised people are infected by inhaling basidiospores foundin aerosols. The thick polysaccharide capsule surrounding these microbes enables them to avoid clearance by thealveolar macrophage. Initial symptoms of infection include fever, fatigue, and a dry cough. In immunocompromisedpatients, pulmonary infections often disseminate to the brain. The resulting meningitis produces headaches, sensitivityto light, and confusion. Left untreated, such infections are often fatal.Cryptococcus infections are often diagnosed based on microscopic examination of lung tissues or cerebrospinalfluids. India ink preparations (Figure 22.28) can be used to visualize the extensive capsules that surround theyeast cells. Serological tests are also available to confirm the diagnosis. Amphotericin B, in combination withflucytosine, is typically used for the initial treatment of pulmonary infections. Amphotericin B is a broad-spectrumantifungal drug that targets fungal cell membranes. It can also adversely impact host cells and produce side effects.For this reason, clinicians must carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatments in these patients. Because itis difficult to eradicate cryptococcal infections, patients usually need to take fluconazole for up to 6 months aftertreatment with amphotericin B and flucytosine to clear the fungus. Cryptococcal infections are more common inimmunocompromised people, such as those with AIDS. These patients typically require life-long suppressive therapyto control this fungal infection.Figure 22.28 (a) The micrograph shows stained budding Cryptococcus yeast cells from the lungs of a patient withAIDS. (b) The large capsule of Cryptococcus neoformans is visible in this negative stain micrograph. (credit a, b:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What populations are most at risk for developing Pneumocystis pneumonia or cryptococcosis?• Why are these infections fatal if left untreated?Fungal Diseases of the Respiratory TractMost respiratory mycoses are caused by fungi that inhabit the environment. Such infections are generallytransmitted via inhalation of fungal spores and cannot be transmitted between humans. In addition, healthypeople are generally not susceptible to infection even when exposed; the fungi are only virulent enough toestablish infection in patients with HIV, AIDS, or another condition that compromises the immune defenses.Disease ProfileChapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 1003Figure 22.29 summarizes the features of important respiratory mycoses.Figure 22.29Summary22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract• The respiratory tract is divided into upper and lower regions at the epiglottis.1004 Chapter 22 | Respiratory System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Air enters the upper respiratory tract through the nasal cavity and mouth, which both lead to the pharynx.The lower respiratory tract extends from the larynx into the trachea before branching into the bronchi, whichdivide further to form the bronchioles, which terminate in alveoli, where gas exchange occurs.• The upper respiratory tract is colonized by an extensive and diverse normal microbiota, many of which arepotential pathogens. Few microbial inhabitants have been found in the lower respiratory tract, and these maybe transients.• Members of the normal microbiota may cause opportunistic infections, using a variety of strategies toovercome the innate nonspecific defenses (including the mucociliary escalator) and adaptive specific defensesof the respiratory system.• Effective vaccines are available for many common respiratory pathogens, both bacterial and viral.• Most respiratory infections result in inflammation of the infected tissues; these conditions are given namesending in -itis, such as rhinitis, sinusitis, otitis, pharyngitis, and bronchitis.22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract• A wide variety of bacteria can cause respiratory diseases; most are treatable with antibiotics or preventablewith vaccines.• Streptococcus pyogenes causes strep throat, an infection of the pharynx that also causes high fever and canlead to scarlet fever, acute rheumatic fever, and acute glomerulonephritis.• Acute otitis media is an infection of the middle ear that may be caused by several bacteria, includingStreptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. The infection can block theeustachian tubes, leading to otitis media with effusion.• Diphtheria, caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is now a rare disease because of widespreadvaccination. The bacteria produce exotoxins that kill cells in the pharynx, leading to the formation of apseudomembrane; and damage other parts of the body.• Bacterial pneumonia results from infections that cause inflammation and fluid accumulation in the alveoli.It is most commonly caused by S. pneumoniae or H. influenzae. The former is commonly multidrug resistant.• Mycoplasma pneumonia results from infection by Mycoplasma pneumoniae; it can spread quickly, but thedisease is mild and self-limiting.• Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three pathogens that are obligate intracellular parasites.Chlamydophila pneumoniae is typically transmitted from an infected person, whereas C. psittaci is typicallytransmitted from an infected bird. Chlamydia trachomatis, may cause pneumonia in infants.• Several other bacteria can cause pneumonia in immunocompromised individuals and those with cysticfibrosis.• Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infection leads to the production of protectivetubercles in the alveoli and calcified Ghon complexes that can harbor the bacteria for a long time. Antibioticresistantforms are common and treatment is typically long term.• Pertussis is caused by Bordetella pertussis. Mucus accumulation in the lungs leads to prolonged severecoughing episodes (whooping cough) that facilitate transmission. Despite an available vaccine, outbreaks arestill common.• Legionnaires disease is caused by infection from environmental reservoirs of the Legionella pneumophilabacterium. The bacterium is endocytic within macrophages and infection can lead to pneumonia, particularlyamong immunocompromised individuals.• Q fever is caused by Coxiella burnetii, whose primary hosts are domesticated mammals (zoonotic disease). Itcauses pneumonia primarily in farm workers and can lead to serious complications, such as endocarditis.22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract• Viruses cause respiratory tract infections more frequently than bacteria, and most viral infections lead to mildsymptoms.• The common cold can be caused by more than 200 viruses, typically rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, andChapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections 1005adenoviruses, transmitted by direct contact, aerosols, or environmental surfaces.• Due to its ability to rapidly mutate through antigenic drift and antigenic shift, influenza remains animportant threat to human health. Two new influenza vaccines are developed annually.• Several viral infections, including respiratory syncytial virus infections, which frequently occur in the veryyoung, can begin with mild symptoms before progressing to viral pneumonia.• SARS and MERS are acute respiratory infections caused by coronaviruses, and both appear to originate inanimals. SARS has not been seen in the human population since 2004 but had a high mortality rate during itsoutbreak. MERS also has a high mortality rate and continues to appear in human populations.• Measles, rubella, and chickenpox are highly contagious, systemic infections that gain entry through therespiratory system and cause rashes and fevers. Vaccines are available for all three. Measles is the most severeof the three and is responsible for significant mortality around the world. Chickenpox typically causes mildinfections in children but the virus can reactivate to cause painful cases of shingles later in life.22.4 Respiratory Mycoses• Fungal pathogens rarely cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals, but inhalation of fungal spores cancause severe pneumonia and systemic infections in immunocompromised patients.• Antifungal drugs like amphotericin B can control most fungal respiratory infections.• Histoplasmosis is caused by a mold that grows in soil rich in bird or bat droppings. Few exposed individualsbecome sick, but vulnerable individuals are susceptible. The yeast-like infectious cells grow insidephagocytes.• Coccidioidomycosis is also acquired from soil and, in some individuals, will cause lesions on the face.Extreme cases may infect other organs, causing death.• Blastomycosis, a rare disease caused by a soil fungus, typically produces a mild lung infection but can becomedisseminated in the immunocompromised. Systemic cases are fatal if untreated.• Mucormycosis is a rare disease, caused by fungi of the order Mucorales. It primarily affectsimmunocompromised people. Infection involves growth of the hyphae into infected tissues and can lead todeath in some cases.• Aspergillosis, caused by the common soil fungus Aspergillus, infects immunocompromised people. Hyphalballs may impede lung function and hyphal growth into tissues can cause damage. Disseminated forms canlead to death.• Pneumocystis pneumonia is caused by the fungus P. jirovecii. The disease is found in patients with AIDS andother immunocompromised individuals. Sulfa drug treatments have side effects, but untreated cases may befatal.• Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus neoformans. Lung infections may move to the brain, causingmeningitis, which can be fatal.