Chapter 26Nervous System InfectionsFigure 26.1 This dog is exhibiting the restlessness and aggression associated with rabies, a neurological diseasethat frequently affects mammals and can be transmitted to humans. (credit: modification of work by the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)Chapter Outline26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous SystemIntroductionFew diseases inspire the kind of fear that rabies does. The name is derived from the Latin word for “madness” or“fury,” most likely because animals infected with rabies may behave with uncharacteristic rage and aggression. Andwhile the thought of being attacked by a rabid animal is terrifying enough, the disease itself is even more frightful.Once symptoms appear, the disease is almost always fatal, even when treated.Rabies is an example of a neurological disease caused by an acellular pathogen. The rabies virus enters nervous tissueshortly after transmission and makes its way to the central nervous system, where its presence leads to changes inbehavior and motor function. Well-known symptoms associated with rabid animals include foaming at the mouth,hydrophobia (fear of water), and unusually aggressive behavior. Rabies claims tens of thousands of human livesworldwide, mainly in Africa and Asia. Most human cases result from dog bites, although many mammal speciescan become infected and transmit the disease. Human infection rates are low in the United States and many othercountries as a result of control measures in animal populations. However, rabies is not the only disease with seriousor fatal neurological effects. In this chapter, we examine the important microbial diseases of the nervous system.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 116926.1 Anatomy of the Nervous SystemLearning Objectives• Describe the major anatomical features of the nervous system• Explain why there is no normal microbiota of the nervous system• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of the nervous system to cause infection• Identify and describe general symptoms associated with various infections of the nervous systemThe human nervous system can be divided into two interacting subsystems: the peripheral nervous system (PNS)and the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral nervous systemis an extensive network of nerves connecting the CNS to the muscles and sensory structures. The relationship of thesesystems is illustrated in Figure 26.2.The Central Nervous SystemThe brain is the most complex and sensitive organ in the body. It is responsible for all functions of the body, includingserving as the coordinating center for all sensations, mobility, emotions, and intellect. Protection for the brain isprovided by the bones of the skull, which in turn are covered by the scalp, as shown in Figure 26.3. The scalpis composed of an outer layer of skin, which is loosely attached to the aponeurosis, a flat, broad tendon layer thatanchors the superficial layers of the skin. The periosteum, below the aponeurosis, firmly encases the bones of theskull and provides protection, nutrition to the bone, and the capacity for bone repair. Below the boney layer of theskull are three layers of membranes called meninges that surround the brain. The relative positions of these meningesare shown in Figure 26.3. The meningeal layer closest to the bones of the skull is called the dura mater (literallymeaning tough mother). Below the dura mater lies the arachnoid mater (literally spider-like mother). The innermostmeningeal layer is a delicate membrane called the pia mater (literally tender mother). Unlike the other meningeallayers, the pia mater firmly adheres to the convoluted surface of the brain. Between the arachnoid mater and pia materis the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space within this region is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Thiswatery fluid is produced by cells of the choroid plexus—areas in each ventricle of the brain that consist of cuboidalepithelial cells surrounding dense capillary beds. The CSF serves to deliver nutrients and remove waste from neuraltissues.Part 1David is a 35-year-old carpenter from New Jersey. A year ago, he was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, achronic inflammatory bowel disease that has no known cause. He has been taking a prescription corticosteroidto manage the condition, and the drug has been highly effective in keeping his symptoms at bay. However,David recently fell ill and decided to visit his primary care physician. His symptoms included a fever, apersistent cough, and shortness of breath. His physician ordered a chest X-ray, which revealed consolidationof the right lung. The doctor prescribed a course of levofloxacin and told David to come back in a week if hedid not feel better.• What type of drug is levofloxacin?• What type of microbes would this drug be effective against?• What type of infection is consistent with David’s symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1170 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.2 The essential components of the human nervous system are shown in this illustration. The centralnervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord. It connects to the peripheral nervous system (PNS), anetwork of nerves that extends throughout the body.Figure 26.3 The layers of tissue surrounding the human brain include three meningeal membranes: the dura mater,arachnoid mater, and pia mater. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1171The Blood-Brain BarrierThe tissues of the CNS have extra protection in that they are not exposed to blood or the immune system in thesame way as other tissues. The blood vessels that supply the brain with nutrients and other chemical substances lieon top of the pia mater. The capillaries associated with these blood vessels in the brain are less permeable than thosein other locations in the body. The capillary endothelial cells form tight junctions that control the transfer of bloodcomponents to the brain. In addition, cranial capillaries have far fewer fenestra (pore-like structures that are sealedby a membrane) and pinocytotic vesicles than other capillaries. As a result, materials in the circulatory system have avery limited ability to interact with the CNS directly. This phenomenon is referred to as the blood-brain barrier.The blood-brain barrier protects the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination, and can be quite effective at excludingpotential microbial pathogens. As a consequence of these defenses, there is no normal microbiota in the cerebrospinalfluid. The blood-brain barrier also inhibits the movement of many drugs into the brain, particularly compounds thatare not lipid soluble. This has profound ramifications for treatments involving infections of the CNS, because it isdifficult for drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier to interact with pathogens that cause infections.The spinal cord also has protective structures similar to those surrounding the brain.Within the bones of the vertebraeare meninges of dura mater (sometimes called the dural sheath), arachnoid mater, pia mater, and a blood-spinal cordbarrier that controls the transfer of blood components from blood vessels associated with the spinal cord.To cause an infection in the CNS, pathogens must successfully breach the blood-brain barrier or blood-spinalcord barrier. Various pathogens employ different virulence factors and mechanisms to achieve this, but they cangenerally be grouped into four categories: intercellular (also called paracellular), transcellular, leukocyte facilitated,and nonhematogenous. Intercellular entry involves the use of microbial virulence factors, toxins, or inflammationmediatedprocesses to pass between the cells of the blood-brain barrier. In transcellular entry, the pathogen passesthrough the cells of the blood-brain barrier using virulence factors that allow it to adhere to and trigger uptakeby vacuole- or receptor-mediated mechanisms. Leukocyte-facilitated entry is a Trojan-horse mechanism that occurswhen a pathogen infects peripheral blood leukocytes to directly enter the CNS. Nonhematogenous entry allowspathogens to enter the brain without encountering the blood-brain barrier; it occurs when pathogens travel along eitherthe olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerves that lead directly into the CNS.View this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22bldbrbarr) about the bloodbrainbarrier• What is the primary function of the blood-brain barrier?The Peripheral Nervous SystemThe PNS is formed of the nerves that connect organs, limbs, and other anatomic structures of the body to the brainand spinal cord. Unlike the brain and spinal cord, the PNS is not protected by bone, meninges, or a blood barrier,and, as a consequence, the nerves of the PNS are much more susceptible to injury and infection. Microbial damage toperipheral nerves can lead to tingling or numbness known as neuropathy. These symptoms can also be produced bytrauma and noninfectious causes such as drugs or chronic diseases like diabetes.Link to Learning1172 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The Cells of the Nervous SystemTissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells (neuroglial cells) and neurons (nerve cells).Glial cells assist in the organization of neurons, provide a scaffold for some aspects of neuronal function, and aid inrecovery from neural injury.Neurons are specialized cells found throughout the nervous system that transmit signals through the nervous systemusing electrochemical processes. The basic structure of a neuron is shown in Figure 26.4. The cell body (orsoma) is the metabolic center of the neuron and contains the nucleus and most of the cell’s organelles. The manyfinely branched extensions from the soma are called dendrites. The soma also produces an elongated extension,called the axon, which is responsible for the transmission of electrochemical signals through elaborate ion transportprocesses. Axons of some types of neurons can extend up to one meter in length in the human body. To facilitateelectrochemical signal transmission, some neurons have a myelin sheath surrounding the axon. Myelin, formed fromthe cell membranes of glial cells like the Schwann cells in the PNS and oligodendrocytes in the CNS, surrounds andinsulates the axon, significantly increasing the speed of electrochemical signal transmission along the axon. The endof an axon forms numerous branches that end in bulbs called synaptic terminals. Neurons form junctions with othercells, such as another neuron, with which they exchange signals. The junctions, which are actually gaps betweenneurons, are referred to as synapses. At each synapse, there is a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic neuron (orother cell). The synaptic terminals of the axon of the presynaptic terminal form the synapse with the dendrites, soma,or sometimes the axon of the postsynaptic neuron, or a part of another type of cell such as a muscle cell. The synapticterminals contain vesicles filled with chemicals called neurotransmitters. When the electrochemical signal movingdown the axon reaches the synapse, the vesicles fuse with the membrane, and neurotransmitters are released, whichdiffuse across the synapse and bind to receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, potentially initiating aresponse in that cell. That response in the postsynaptic cell might include further propagation of an electrochemicalsignal to transmit information or contraction of a muscle fiber.Figure 26.4 (a) A myelinated neuron is associated with oligodendrocytes. Oligodendrocytes are a type of glial cellthat forms the myelin sheath in the CNS that insulates the axon so that electrochemical nerve impulses aretransferred more efficiently. (b) A synapse consists of the axonal end of the presynaptic neuron (top) that releasesneurotransmitters that cross the synaptic space (or cleft) and bind to receptors on dendrites of the postsynapticneuron (bottom).Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1173• What cells are associated with neurons, and what is their function?• What is the structure and function of a synapse?Meningitis and EncephalitisAlthough the skull provides the brain with an excellent defense, it can also become problematic during infections.Any swelling of the brain or meninges that results from inflammation can cause intracranial pressure, leading tosevere damage of the brain tissues, which have limited space to expand within the inflexible bones of the skull. Theterm meningitis is used to describe an inflammation of the meninges. Typical symptoms can include severe headache,fever, photophobia (increased sensitivity to light), stiff neck, convulsions, and confusion. An inflammation of braintissue is called encephalitis, and patients exhibit signs and symptoms similar to those of meningitis in addition tolethargy, seizures, and personality changes. When inflammation affects both the meninges and the brain tissue, thecondition is called meningoencephalitis. All three forms of inflammation are serious and can lead to blindness,deafness, coma, and death.Meningitis and encephalitis can be caused by many different types of microbial pathogens. However, these conditionscan also arise from noninfectious causes such as head trauma, some cancers, and certain drugs that triggerinflammation. To determine whether the inflammation is caused by a pathogen, a lumbar puncture is performed toobtain a sample of CSF. If the CSF contains increased levels of white blood cells and abnormal glucose and proteinlevels, this indicates that the inflammation is a response to an infectioninflinin.• What are the two types of inflammation that can impact the CNS?• Why do both forms of inflammation have such serious consequences?Guillain-Barré SyndromeGuillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare condition that can be preceded by a viral or bacterial infection thatresults in an autoimmune reaction against myelinated nerve cells. The destruction of the myelin sheath aroundthese neurons results in a loss of sensation and function. The first symptoms of this condition are tingling andweakness in the affected tissues. The symptoms intensify over a period of several weeks and can culminate incomplete paralysis. Severe cases can be life-threatening. Infections by several different microbial pathogens,including Campylobacter jejuni (the most common risk factor), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicellazostervirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,[1] and Zika virus[2] have been identified as triggers for GBS. Anti-myelinantibodies from patients with GBS have been demonstrated to also recognize C. jejuni. It is possible that crossreactiveantibodies, antibodies that react with similar antigenic sites on different proteins, might be formedduring an infection and may lead to this autoimmune response.GBS is solely identified by the appearance of clinical symptoms. There are no other diagnostic tests available.Fortunately, most cases spontaneously resolve within a few months with few permanent effects, as there is noavailable vaccine. GBS can be treated by plasmapheresis. In this procedure, the patient’s plasma is filteredfrom their blood, removing autoantibodies.Micro Connections1174 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.526.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the nervous system• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the nervous systemBacterial infections that affect the nervous system are serious and can be life-threatening. Fortunately, there are onlya few bacterial species commonly associated with neurological infections.Bacterial MeningitisBacterial meningitis is one of the most serious forms of meningitis. Bacteria that cause meningitis often gain accessto the CNS through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxins. Bacteria may alsospread from structures in the upper respiratory tract, such as the oropharynx, nasopharynx, sinuses, and middle ear.Patients with head wounds or cochlear implants (an electronic device placed in the inner ear) are also at risk fordeveloping meningitis.Many of the bacteria that can cause meningitis are commonly found in healthy people. The most common causesof non-neonatal bacterial meningitis are Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilusinfluenzae. All three of these bacterial pathogens are spread from person to person by respiratory secretions. Eachcan colonize and cross through the mucous membranes of the oropharynx and nasopharynx, and enter the blood.Once in the blood, these pathogens can disseminate throughout the body and are capable of both establishing aninfection and triggering inflammation in any body site, including the meninges (Figure 26.5). Without appropriatesystemic antibacterial therapy, the case-fatality rate can be as high as 70%, and 20% of those survivors may be leftwith irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction, resulting in hearing loss, neurologic disability, or loss of a limb.Mortality rates are much lower (as low as 15%) in populations where appropriate therapeutic drugs and preventivevaccines are available.[3]Figure 26.5 (a) A normal human brain removed during an autopsy. (b) The brain of a patient who died from bacterialmeningitis. Note the pus under the dura mater (being retracted by the forceps) and the red hemorrhagic foci on themeninges. (credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)A variety of other bacteria, including Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli, are also capable of causing1. Yuki, Nobuhiro and Hans-Peter Hartung, “Guillain–Barré Syndrome,” New England Journal of Medicine 366, no. 24 (2012): 2294-304.2. Cao-Lormeau, Van-Mai, Alexandre Blake, Sandrine Mons, Stéphane Lastère, Claudine Roche, Jessica Vanhomwegen, Timothée Dub etal., “Guillain-Barré Syndrome Outbreak Associated with Zika Virus Infection in French Polynesia: A Case-Control Study,” The Lancet 387,no. 10027 (2016): 1531-9.3. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison etal., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1175meningitis. These bacteria cause infections of the arachnoid mater and CSF after spreading through the circulationin blood or by spreading from an infection of the sinuses or nasopharynx. Streptococcus agalactiae, commonlyfound in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract, can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborns aftertransmission from the mother either before or during birth.The profound inflammation caused by these microbes can result in early symptoms that include severe headache,fever, confusion, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and stiff neck. Systemic inflammatory responses associated withsome types of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesions on skin, followed by even moresevere conditions that include shock, convulsions, coma, and death—in some cases, in the span of just a few hours.Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is best confirmed by analysis of CSF obtained by a lumbar puncture. Abnormallevels of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) (> 10 PMNs/mm3), glucose (< 45 mg/dL), and protein (> 45 mg/dL) in the CSF are suggestive of bacterial meningitis.[4] Characteristics of specific forms of bacterial meningitis aredetailed in the subsections that follow.Meningococcal MeningitisMeningococcal meningitis is a serious infection caused by the gram-negative coccus N. meningitidis. In some cases,death can occur within a few hours of the onset of symptoms. Nonfatal cases can result in irreversible nerve damage,resulting in hearing loss and brain damage, or amputation of extremities because of tissue necrosis.Meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age, but its prevalence is highest among infants, adolescents,and young adults.[5] Meningococcal meningitis was once the most common cause of meningitis epidemics in humanpopulations. This is still the case in a swath of sub-Saharan Africa known as the meningitis belt, but meningococcalmeningitis epidemics have become rare in most other regions, thanks to meningococcal vaccines. However, outbreakscan still occur in communities, schools, colleges, prisons, and other populations where people are in close directcontact.N. meningitidis has a high affinity for mucosal membranes in the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Contact withrespiratory secretions containing N. meningitidis is an effective mode of transmission. The pathogenicity of N.meningitidis is enhanced by virulence factors that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease. These includelipooligosaccharide (LOS) endotoxin, type IV pili for attachment to host tissues, and polysaccharide capsules thathelp the cells avoid phagocytosis and complement-mediated killing. Additional virulence factors include IgA protease(which breaks down IgA antibodies), the invasion factors Opa, Opc, and porin (which facilitate transcellular entrythrough the blood-brain barrier), iron-uptake factors (which strip heme units from hemoglobin in host cells and usethem for growth), and stress proteins that protect bacteria from reactive oxygen molecules.A unique sign of meningococcal meningitis is the formation of a petechial rash on the skin or mucous membranes,characterized by tiny, red, flat, hemorrhagic lesions. This rash, which appears soon after disease onset, is a response toLOS endotoxin and adherence virulence factors that disrupt the endothelial cells of capillaries and small veins in theskin. The blood vessel disruption triggers the formation of tiny blood clots, causing blood to leak into the surroundingtissue. As the infection progresses, the levels of virulence factors increase, and the hemorrhagic lesions can increasein size as blood continues to leak into tissues. Lesions larger than 1.0 cm usually occur in patients developingshock, as virulence factors cause increased hemorrhage and clot formation. Sepsis, as a result of systemic damagefrom meningococcal virulence factors, can lead to rapid multiple organ failure, shock, disseminated intravascularcoagulation, and death.Because meningococcoal meningitis progresses so rapidly, a greater variety of clinical specimens are required forthe timely detection of N. meningitidis. Required specimens can include blood, CSF, naso- and oropharyngeal swabs,urethral and endocervical swabs, petechial aspirates, and biopsies. Safety protocols for handling and transport ofspecimens suspected of containing N. meningitidis should always be followed, since cases of fatal meningococcal4. Popovic, T., et al. World Health Organization, “Laboratory Manual for the Diagnosis of Meningitis Caused by Neisseria meningitidis,Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenza,” 1999.5. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease,” August 5, 2015. Accessed June 28, 2015.http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.1176 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5disease have occurred in healthcare workers exposed to droplets or aerosols from patient specimens. Promptpresumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when CSF is directly evaluated by Gram stain,revealing extra- and intracellular gram-negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee-bean microscopic morphologyassociated with PMNs (Figure 26.6). Identification can also be made directly from CSF using latex agglutinationand immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests specific for N. meningitidis. Species identification can also beperformed using DNA sequence-based typing schemes for hypervariable outer membrane proteins of N. meningitidis,which has replaced sero(sub)typing.Meningococcal infections can be treated with antibiotic therapy, and third-generation cephalosporins are most oftenemployed. However, because outcomes can be negative even with treatment, preventive vaccination is the best formof treatment. In 2010, countries in Africa’s meningitis belt began using a new serogroup A meningococcal conjugatevaccine. This program has dramatically reduced the number of cases of meningococcal meningitis by conferringindividual and herd immunity.Twelve different capsular serotypes of N. meningitidis are known to exist. Serotypes A, B, C, W, X, and Y are themost prevalent worldwide. The CDC recommends that children between 11–12 years of age be vaccinated with asingle dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protects against serotypes A, C, W, and Y, with a booster at age 16.[6]An additional booster or injections of serogroup B meningococcal vaccine may be given to individuals in high-risksettings (such as epidemic outbreaks on college campuses).Figure 26.6 N. meningitidis (arrows) associated with neutrophils (the larger stained cells) in a gram-stained CSFsample. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Meningitis on CampusCollege students living in dorms or communal housing are at increased risk for contracting epidemic meningitis.From 2011 to 2015, there have been at least nine meningococcal outbreaks on college campuses in the UnitedStates. These incidents involved a total of 43 students (of whom four died).[7] In spite of rapid diagnosis andaggressive antimicrobial treatment, several of the survivors suffered from amputations or serious neurologicalproblems.Prophylactic vaccination of first-year college students living in dorms is recommended by the CDC, andinsurance companies now cover meningococcal vaccination for students in college dorms. Some collegeshave mandated vaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine for certain students entering college(Figure 26.7).Micro Connections6. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Recommended Immunization Schedule for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years, UnitedStates, 2016,” February 1, 2016. Accessed on June 28, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-adolescent.html.7. National Meningitis Association, “Serogroup B Meningococcal Disease Outbreaks on U.S. College Campuses,” 2016. Accessed June 28,2016. http://www.nmaus.org/disease-prevention-information/serogroup-b-meningococcal-disease/outbreaks/.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1177Figure 26.7 To prevent campus outbreaks, some colleges now require students to be vaccinated againstmeningogoccal meningitis. (credit: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Pneumococcal MeningitisPneumococcal meningitis is caused by the encapsulated gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae (pneumococcus,also called strep pneumo). This organism is commonly found in the microbiota of the pharynx of 30–70% of youngchildren, depending on the sampling method, while S. pneumoniae can be found in fewer than 5% of healthy adults.Although it is often present without disease symptoms, this microbe can cross the blood-brain barrier in susceptibleindividuals. In some cases, it may also result in septicemia. Since the introduction of the Hib vaccine, S. pneumoniaehas become the leading cause of meningitis in humans aged 2 months through adulthood.S. pneumoniae can be identified in CSF samples using gram-stained specimens, latex agglutination, andimmunochromatographic RDT specific for S. pneumoniae. In gram-stained samples, S. pneumoniae appears as grampositive,lancet-shaped diplococci (Figure 26.8). Identification of S. pneumoniae can also be achieved using culturesof CSF and blood, and at least 93 distinct serotypes can be identified based on the quellung reaction to unique capsularpolysaccharides. PCR and RT-PCR assays are also available to confirm identification.Major virulence factors produced by S. pneumoniae include PI-1 pilin for adherence to host cells (pneumococcaladherence) and virulence factor B (PavB) for attachment to cells of the respiratory tract; choline-binding proteins(cbpA) that bind to epithelial cells and interfere with immune factors IgA and C3; and the cytoplasmic bacterial toxinpneumolysin that triggers an inflammatory response.With the emergence of drug-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae, pneumococcal meningitis is typically treated withbroad-spectrum antibiotics, such as levofloxacin, cefotaxime, penicillin, or other β-lactam antibiotics. The twoavailable pneumococcal vaccines are described in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.1178 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.8 (a) Digitally colorized fluorescent antibody stained micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae in CSF. (b)S. pneumoniae growing on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit b: modification of work by Nathan Reading)Haemophilus influenzae Type bMeningitis due to H. influenzae serotype b (Hib), an encapsulated pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli, is nowuncommon in most countries, because of the use of the effective Hib vaccine. Without the use of the Hib vaccine,H. influenzae can be the primary cause of meningitis in children 2 months thru 5 years of age. H. influenzae can befound in the throats of healthy individuals, including infants and young children. By five years of age, most childrenhave developed immunity to this microbe. Infants older than 2 months of age, however, do not produce a sufficientprotective antibody response and are susceptible to serious disease. The intracranial pressure caused by this infectionleads to a 5% mortality rate and 20% incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors.[8]H. influenzae produces at least 16 different virulence factors, including LOS, which triggers inflammation, andHaemophilus adhesion and penetration factor (Hap), which aids in attachment and invasion into respiratory epithelialcells. The bacterium also has a polysaccharide capsule that helps it avoid phagocytosis, as well as factors such asIgA1 protease and P2 protein that allow it to evade antibodies secreted from mucous membranes. In addition, factorssuch as hemoglobin-binding protein (Hgp) and transferrin-binding protein (Tbp) acquire iron from hemoglobin andtransferrin, respectively, for bacterial growth.Preliminary diagnosis of H. influenzae infections can be made by direct PCR and a smear of CSF. Stained smearswill reveal intracellular and extracellular PMNs with small, pleomorphic, gram-negative coccobacilli or filamentousforms that are characteristic of H. influenzae. Initial confirmation of this genus can be based on its fastidious growthon chocolate agar. Identification is confirmed with requirements for exogenous biochemical growth cofactors NADand heme (by MALDI-TOF), latex agglutination, and RT-PCR.Meningitis caused by H. influenzae is usually treated with doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, second- and thirdgenerationcephalosporins, and carbapenems. The best means of preventing H. influenza infection is with the useof the Hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine. It is recommended that all children receive this vaccine at 2, 4, and 6months of age, with a final booster dose at 12 to 15 months of age.[9]8. United States Department of Health and Human Services, “Hib (Haemophilus Influenzae Type B),” Accessed June 28, 2016.http://www.vaccines.gov/diseases/hib/#.9. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease, Disease Trends,” 2015. Accessed September 13, 2016.http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1179Neonatal MeningitisS. agalactiae, Group B streptococcus (GBS), is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium that is the most commoncause of neonatal meningitis, a term that refers to meningitis occurring in babies up to 3 months of age.[10] S.agalactiae can also cause meningitis in people of all ages and can be found in the urogenital and gastrointestinalmicrobiota of about 10–30% of humans.Neonatal infection occurs as either early onset or late-onset disease. Early onset disease is defined as occurring ininfants up to 7 days old. The infant initially becomes infected by S. agalactiae during childbirth, when the bacteriamay be transferred from the mother’s vagina. Incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduced bygiving intravenous antibiotics to the mother during labor.Late-onset neonatal meningitis occurs in infants between 1 week and 3 months of age. Infants born to mothers with S.agalactiae in the urogenital tract have a higher risk of late-onset menigitis, but late-onset infections can be transmittedfrom sources other than the mother; often, the source of infection is unknown. Infants who are born prematurely(before 37 weeks of pregnancy) or to mothers who develop a fever also have a greater risk of contracting late-onsetneonatal meningitis.Signs and symptoms of early onset disease include temperature instability, apnea (cessation of breathing), bradycardia(slow heart rate), hypotension, difficulty feeding, irritability, and limpness. When asleep, the baby may be difficult towake up. Symptoms of late-onset disease are more likely to include seizures, bulging fontanel (soft spot), stiff neck,hemiparesis (weakness on one side of the body), and opisthotonos (rigid body with arched back and head thrownbackward).S. agalactiae produces at least 12 virulence factors that include FbsA that attaches to host cell surface proteins, PI-1pili that promotes the invasion of human endothelial cells, a polysaccharide capsule that prevents the activation of thealternative complement pathway and inhibits phagocytosis, and the toxin CAMP factor, which forms pores in hostcell membranes and binds to IgG and IgM antibodies.Diagnosis of neonatal meningitis is often, but not uniformly, confirmed by positive results from cultures of CSF orblood. Tests include routine culture, antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay, serotyping of different capsule types,PCR, and RT-PCR. It is typically treated with β-lactam antibiotics such as intravenous penicillin or ampicillin plusgentamicin. Even with treatment, roughly 10% mortality is seen in infected neonates.[11]• Which groups are most vulnerable to each of the bacterial meningitis diseases?• For which of the bacterial meningitis diseases are there vaccines presently available?• Which organism can cause epidemic meningitis?Clostridium-Associated DiseasesSpecies in the genus Clostridium are gram-positive, endospore-forming rods that are obligate anaerobes. Endosporesof Clostridium spp. are widespread in nature, commonly found in soil, water, feces, sewage, and marine sediments.Clostridium spp. produce more types of protein exotoxins than any other bacterial genus, including two exotoxinswith protease activity that are the most potent known biological toxins: botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) and tetanus10. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison etal., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.11. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison etal., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25; Heath, Paul T.,Gail Balfour, Abbie M. Weisner, Androulla Efstratiou, Theresa L. Lamagni, Helen Tighe, Liam AF O’Connell et al., “Group B StreptococcalDisease in UK and Irish Infants Younger than 90 Days,” The Lancet 363, no. 9405 (2004): 292-4.1180 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5neurotoxin (TeNT). These two toxins have lethal doses of 0.2–10 ng per kg body weight.BoNT can be produced by unique strains of C. butyricum, and C. baratii; however, it is primarily associated with C.botulinum and the condition of botulism. TeNT, which causes tetanus, is only produced by C. tetani. These powerfulneural exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for these pathogens. The mode of action for these toxins wasdescribed in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens and illustrated in Figure 15.16.Diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involves bioassays that detect the presence of BoNT and TeNT in fecalspecimens, blood (serum), or suspect foods. In addition, both C. botulinum and C. tetani can be isolated and culturedusing commercially available media for anaerobes. ELISA and RT-PCR tests are also available.TetanusTetanus is a noncommunicable disease characterized by uncontrollable muscle spasms (contractions) caused by theaction of TeNT. It generally occurs when C. tetani infects a wound and produces TeNT, which rapidly binds to neuraltissue, resulting in an intoxication (poisoning) of neurons. Depending on the site and extent of infection, cases oftetanus can be described as localized, cephalic, or generalized. Generalized tetanus that occurs in a newborn is calledneonatal tetanus.Localized tetanus occurs when TeNT only affects the muscle groups close to the injury site. There is no CNSinvolvement, and the symptoms are usually mild, with localized muscle spasms caused by a dysfunction in thesurrounding neurons. Individuals with partial immunity—especially previously vaccinated individuals who neglect toget the recommended booster shots—are most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of C. tetani infecting apuncture wound.Cephalic tetanus is a rare, localized form of tetanus generally associated with wounds on the head or face. In rarecases, it has occurred in cases of otitis media (middle ear infection). Cephalic tetanus often results in patients seeingdouble images, because of the spasms affecting the muscles that control eye movement.Both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalized tetanus—a much more serious condition—if TeNTis able to spread further into body tissues. In generalized tetanus, TeNT enters neurons of the PNS. From there, TeNTtravels from the site of the wound, usually on an extremity of the body, retrograde (back up) to inhibitory neuronsin the CNS. There, it prevents the release of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the neurotransmitter responsiblefor muscle relaxation. The resulting muscle spasms often first occur in the jaw muscles, leading to the characteristicsymptom of lockjaw (inability to open the mouth). As the toxin progressively continues to block neurotransmitterrelease, other muscles become involved, resulting in uncontrollable, sudden muscle spasms that are powerful enoughto cause tendons to rupture and bones to fracture. Spasms in the muscles in the neck, back, and legs may cause thebody to form a rigid, stiff arch, a posture called opisthotonos (Figure 26.9). Spasms in the larynx, diaphragm, andmuscles of the chest restrict the patient’s ability to swallow and breathe, eventually leading to death by asphyxiation(insufficient supply of oxygen).Neonatal tetanus typically occurs when the stump of the umbilical cord is contaminated with spores of C. tetani afterdelivery. Although this condition is rare in the United States, neonatal tetanus is a major cause of infant mortality incountries that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occurs in unsanitary conditions. At theend of the first week of life, infected infants become irritable, feed poorly, and develop rigidity with spasms. Neonataltetanus has a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 70%–100%.[12]Treatment for patients with tetanus includes assisted breathing through the use of a ventilator, wound debridement,fluid balance, and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of C. tetani. In addition,patients are treated with TeNT antitoxin, preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixedtoxin and benzodiazepines to enhance the effect of GABA for muscle relaxation and anxiety.A tetanus toxoid (TT) vaccine is available for protection and prevention of tetanus. It is the T component of vaccinessuch as DTaP, Tdap, and Td. The CDC recommends children receive doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15–1812. UNFPA, UNICEF WHO, “Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination by 2005,” 2000. http://www.unicef.org/immunization/files/MNTE_strategy_paper.pdf.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1181months of age and another at 4–6 years of age. One dose of Td is recommended for adolescents and adults as a TTbooster every 10 years.[13]Figure 26.9 A tetanus patient exhibiting the rigid body posture known as opisthotonos. (credit: Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)BotulismBotulism is a rare but frequently fatal illness caused by intoxication by BoNT. It can occur either as the result of aninfection by C. botulinum, in which case the bacteria produce BoNT in vivo, or as the result of a direct introductionof BoNT into tissues.Infection and production of BoNT in vivo can result in wound botulism, infant botulism, and adult intestinal toxemia.Wound botulism typically occurs when C. botulinum is introduced directly into a wound after a traumatic injury, deeppuncture wound, or injection site. Infant botulism, which occurs in infants younger than 1 year of age, and adultintestinal toxemia, which occurs in immunocompromised adults, results from ingesting C. botulinum endospores infood. The endospores germinate in the body, resulting in the production of BoNT in the intestinal tract.Intoxications occur when BoNT is produced outside the body and then introduced directly into the body through food(foodborne botulism), air (inhalation botulism), or a clinical procedure (iatrogenic botulism). Foodborne botulism, themost common of these forms, occurs when BoNT is produced in contaminated food and then ingested along with thefood (recall Case in Point: A Streak of Bad Potluck). Inhalation botulism is rare because BoNT is unstable asan aerosol and does not occur in nature; however, it can be produced in the laboratory and was used (unsuccessfully)as a bioweapon by terrorists in Japan in the 1990s. A few cases of accidental inhalation botulism have also occurred.Iatrogenic botulism is also rare; it is associated with injections of BoNT used for cosmetic purposes (see MicroConnections: Medicinal Uses of Botulinum Toxin).When BoNT enters the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal tract, wound, or lungs, it is transferred to theneuromuscular junctions of motor neurons where it binds irreversibly to presynaptic membranes and prevents therelease of acetylcholine from the presynaptic terminal of motor neurons into the neuromuscular junction. Theconsequence of preventing acetylcholine release is the loss of muscle activity, leading to muscle relaxation andeventually paralysis.If BoNT is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract, early symptoms of botulism include blurred vision, droopingeyelids, difficulty swallowing, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or possibly diarrhea. This isfollowed by progressive flaccid paralysis, a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscles. A patient’sexperience can be particularly terrifying, because hearing remains normal, consciousness is not lost, and he or she is13. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Tetanus Vaccination,” 2013. Accessed June 29, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/tetanus/vaccination.html.1182 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5fully aware of the progression of his or her condition. In infants, notable signs of botulism include weak cry, decreasedability to suckle, and hypotonia (limpness of head or body). Eventually, botulism ends in death from respiratoryfailure caused by the progressive paralysis of the muscles of the upper airway, diaphragm, and chest.Botulism is treated with an antitoxin specific for BoNT. If administered in time, the antitoxin stops the progression ofparalysis but does not reverse it. Once the antitoxin has been administered, the patient will slowly regain neurologicalfunction, but this may take several weeks or months, depending on the severity of the case. During recovery, patientsgenerally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator.• How frequently should the tetanus vaccination be updated in adults?• What are the most common causes of botulism?• Why is botulism not treated with an antibiotic?Medicinal Uses of Botulinum ToxinAlthough it is the most toxic biological material known to man, botulinum toxin is often intentionally injected intopeople to treat other conditions. Type A botulinum toxin is used cosmetically to reduce wrinkles. The injectionof minute quantities of this toxin into the face causes the relaxation of facial muscles, thereby giving the skin asmoother appearance. Eyelid twitching and crossed eyes can also be treated with botulinum toxin injections.Other uses of this toxin include the treatment of hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating). In fact, botulinum toxincan be used to moderate the effects of several other apparently nonmicrobial diseases involving inappropriatenerve function. Such diseases include cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease. Each ofthese diseases is characterized by a loss of control over muscle contractions; treatment with botulinum toxinserves to relax contracted muscles.ListeriosisListeria monocytogenes is a nonencapsulated, nonsporulating, gram-positive rod and a foodborne pathogen thatcauses listeriosis. At-risk groups include pregnant women, neonates, the elderly, and the immunocompromised(recall the Clinical Focus case studies in Microbial Growth and Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity).Listeriosis leads to meningitis in about 20% of cases, particularly neonates and patients over the age of 60. The CDCidentifies listeriosis as the third leading cause of death due to foodborne illness, with overall mortality rates reaching16%.[14] In pregnant women, listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant women because of thepathogen’s unique ability to cross the placenta.L. monocytogenes is generally introduced into food items by contamination with soil or animal manure used asfertilizer. Foods commonly associated with listeriosis include fresh fruits and vegetables, frozen vegetables, processedmeats, soft cheeses, and raw milk.[15] Unlike most other foodborne pathogens, Listeria is able to grow at temperaturesbetween 0 °C and 50 °C, and can therefore continue to grow, even in refrigerated foods.Micro Connections14. Scallan, Elaine, Robert M. Hoekstra, Frederick J. Angulo, Robert V. Tauxe, Marc-Alain Widdowson, Sharon L. Roy, Jeffery L. Jones,and Patricia M. Griffin, “Foodborne Illness Acquired in the United States—Major Pathogens,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 17, no. 1(2011): 7-15.15. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Listeria Outbreaks,” 2016. Accessed June 29, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/index.html.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1183Ingestion of contaminated food leads initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract. However, L. monocytogenesproduces several unique virulence factors that allow it to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other bodysystems. Surface proteins called internalins (InlA and InlB) help L. monocytogenes invade nonphagocytic cells andtissues, penetrating the intestinal wall and becoming disseminating through the circulatory and lymphatic systems.Internalins also enable L. monocytogenes to breach other important barriers, including the blood-brain barrier andthe placenta. Within tissues, L. monocytogenes uses other proteins called listeriolysin O and ActA to facilitateintercellular movement, allowing the infection to spread from cell to cell (Figure 26.10).L. monocytogenes is usually identified by cultivation of samples from a normally sterile site (e.g., blood or CSF).Recovery of viable organisms can be enhanced using cold enrichment by incubating samples in a broth at 4 °Cfor a week or more. Distinguishing types and subtypes of L. monocytogenes—an important step for diagnosis andepidemiology—is typically done using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Identification can also be achieved usingchemiluminescence DNA probe assays and MALDI-TOF.Treatment for listeriosis involves antibiotic therapy, most commonly with ampicillin and gentamicin. There is novaccine available.Figure 26.10 (a) An electron micrograph of Listeria monocytogenes infecting a host cell. (b) Listeria is able to usehost cell components to cause infection. For example, phagocytosis allows it to enter host cells, and the host’scytoskeleton provides the materials to help the pathogen move to other cells. (credit a: modification of work by theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Keith Ireton)• How does Listeria enter the nervous system?Hansen’s Disease (Leprosy)Hansen’s disease (also known as leprosy) is caused by a long, thin, filamentous rod-shaped bacteriumMycobacterium leprae, an obligate intracellular pathogen. M. leprae is classified as gram-positive bacteria, but it isbest visualized microscopically with an acid-fast stain and is generally referred to as an acid-fast bacterium. Hansen’sdisease affects the PNS, leading to permanent damage and loss of appendages or other body parts.1184 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Hansen’s disease is communicable but not highly contagious; approximately 95% of the human population cannot beeasily infected because they have a natural immunity to M. leprae. Person-to-person transmission occurs by inhalationinto nasal mucosa or prolonged and repeated contact with infected skin. Armadillos, one of only five mammalssusceptible to Hansen’s disease, have also been implicated in transmission of some cases.[16]In the human body, M. leprae grows best at the cooler temperatures found in peripheral tissues like the nose,toes, fingers, and ears. Some of the virulence factors that contribute to M. leprae’s pathogenicity are located onthe capsule and cell wall of the bacterium. These virulence factors enable it to bind to and invade Schwann cells,resulting in progressive demyelination that gradually destroys neurons of the PNS. The loss of neuronal functionleads to hypoesthesia (numbness) in infected lesions. M. leprae is readily phagocytized by macrophages but is ableto survive within macrophages in part by neutralizing reactive oxygen species produced in the oxidative burst of thephagolysosome. Like L. monocytogenes, M. leprae also can move directly between macrophages to avoid clearanceby immune factors.The extent of the disease is related to the immune response of the patient. Initial symptoms may not appear for as longas 2 to 5 years after infection. These often begin with small, blanched, numb areas of the skin. In most individuals,these will resolve spontaneously, but some cases may progress to a more serious form of the disease. Tuberculoid(paucibacillary) Hansen’s disease is marked by the presence of relatively few (three or less) flat, blanched skin lesionswith small nodules at the edges and few bacteria present in the lesion. Although these lesions can persist for yearsor decades, the bacteria are held in check by an effective immune response including cell-mediated cytotoxicity.Individuals who are unable to contain the infection may later develop lepromatous (multibacillary) Hansen’s disease.This is a progressive form of the disease characterized by nodules filled with acid-fast bacilli and macrophages.Impaired function of infected Schwann cells leads to peripheral nerve damage, resulting in sensory loss that leads toulcers, deformities, and fractures. Damage to the ulnar nerve (in the wrist) by M. leprae is one of the most commoncauses of crippling of the hand. In some cases, chronic tissue damage can ultimately lead to loss of fingers or toes.When mucosal tissues are also involved, disfiguring lesions of the nose and face can also occur (Figure 26.11).Hansen’s disease is diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms of the disease, and confirmed by thepresence of acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or in skin biopsy specimens (Figure 26.11). M. leprae does not grow invitro on any known laboratory media, but it can be identified by culturing in vivo in the footpads of laboratory miceor armadillos. Where needed, PCR and genotyping of M. leprae DNA in infected human tissue may be performed fordiagnosis and epidemiology.Hansen’s disease responds well to treatment and, if diagnosed and treated early, does not cause disability. In theUnited States, most patients with Hansen’s disease are treated in ambulatory care clinics in major cities by theNational Hansen’s Disease program, the only institution in the United States exclusively devoted to Hansen’s disease.Since 1995, WHO has made multidrug therapy for Hansen’s disease available free of charge to all patients worldwide.As a result, global prevalence of Hansen’s disease has declined from about 5.2 million cases in 1985 to roughly176,000 in 2014.[17] Multidrug therapy consists of dapsone and rifampicin for all patients and a third drug, clofazimin,for patients with multibacillary disease.Currently, there is no universally accepted vaccine for Hansen’s disease. India and Brazil use a tuberculosis vaccineagainst Hansen’s disease because both diseases are caused by species of Mycobacterium. The effectiveness of thismethod is questionable, however, since it appears that the vaccine works in some populations but not in others.16. Sharma, Rahul, Pushpendra Singh, W. J. Loughry, J. Mitchell Lockhart, W. Barry Inman, Malcolm S. Duthie, Maria T. Pena et al.,“Zoonotic Leprosy in the Southeastern United States,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 21, no. 12 (2015): 2127-34.17. World Health Organization, “Leprosy Fact Sheet,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs101/en/.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1185Figure 26.11 (a) The nose of a patient with Hansen’s disease. Note the lepromatous/multibacillary lesions aroundthe nostril. (b) Hansen’s disease is caused by Mycobacterium leprae, a gram-positive bacillus. (credit a, b:modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What prevents the progression from tuberculoid to lepromatus leprosy?• Why does Hansen’s disease typically affect the nerves of the extremities?Leper ColoniesDisfiguring, deadly diseases like leprosy have historically been stigmatized in many cultures. Before leprosywas understood, victims were often isolated in leper colonies, a practice mentioned frequently in ancient texts,including the Bible. But leper colonies are not just an artifact of the ancient world. In Hawaii, a leper colonyestablished in the late nineteenth century persisted until the mid-twentieth century, its residents forced to live indeplorable conditions.[18] Although leprosy is a communicable disease, it is not considered contagious (easilycommunicable), and it certainly does not pose enough of a threat to justify the permanent isolation of itsvictims. Today, we reserve the practices of isolation and quarantine to patients with more dangerous diseases,such as Ebola or multiple-drug-resistant bacteria like Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Staphylococcus aureus.The ethical argument for this practice is that isolating infected patients is necessary to prevent the transmissionand spread of highly contagious diseases—even when it goes against the wishes of the patient.Of course, it is much easier to justify the practice of temporary, clinical quarantining than permanent socialsegregation, as occurred in leper colonies. In the 1980s, there were calls by some groups to establish campsfor people infected with AIDS. Although this idea was never actually implemented, it begs the question—wheredo we draw the line? Are permanent isolation camps or colonies ever medically or socially justifiable? Supposethere were an outbreak of a fatal, contagious disease for which there is no treatment. Would it be justifiableto impose social isolation on those afflicted with the disease? How would we balance the rights of the infectedwith the risk they pose to others? To what extent should society expect individuals to put their own health atrisk for the sake of treating others humanely?Eye on Ethics1186 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Bacterial Infections of the Nervous SystemDespite the formidable defenses protecting the nervous system, a number of bacterial pathogens are knownto cause serious infections of the CNS or PNS. Unfortunately, these infections are often serious and lifethreatening. Figure 26.12 summarizes some important infections of the nervous system.Disease Profile18. National Park Service, “A Brief History of Kalaupapa,” Accessed February 2, 2016. http://www.nps.gov/kala/learn/historyculture/abrief-history-of-kalaupapa.htm.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1187Figure 26.121188 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.526.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common acellular pathogens that can cause infections of the nervous system• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the nervous systemA number of different viruses and subviral particles can cause diseases that affect the nervous system. Viral diseasestend to be more common than bacterial infections of the nervous system today. Fortunately, viral infections aregenerally milder than their bacterial counterparts and often spontaneously resolve. Some of the more importantacellular pathogens of the nervous system are described in this section.Viral MeningitisAlthough it is much more common than bacterial meningitis, viral meningitis is typically less severe. Many differentviruses can lead to meningitis as a sequela of the primary infection, including those that cause herpes, influenza,measles, and mumps. Most cases of viral meningitis spontaneously resolve, but severe cases do occur.Arboviral EncephalitisSeveral types of insect-borne viruses can cause encephalitis. Collectively, these viruses are referred to as arboviruses(because they are arthropod-borne), and the diseases they cause are described as arboviral encephalitis. Mostarboviruses are endemic to specific geographical regions. Arborviral encephalitis diseases found in the United Statesinclude eastern equine encephalitis (EEE), western equine encephalitis (WEE), St. Louis encephalitis, and West Nileencephalitis (WNE). Expansion of arboviruses beyond their endemic regions sometimes occurs, generally as a resultof environmental changes that are favorable to the virus or its vector. Increased travel of infected humans, animals, orvectors has also allowed arboviruses to spread into new regions.In most cases, arboviral infections are asymptomatic or lead to a mild disease. However, when symptoms do occur,they include high fever, chills, headaches, vomiting, diarrhea, and restlessness. In elderly patients, severe arboviralencephalitis can rapidly lead to convulsions, coma, and death.Mosquitoes are the most common biological vectors for arboviruses, which tend to be enveloped ssRNA viruses.Thus, prevention of arboviral infections is best achieved by avoiding mosquitoes—using insect repellent, wearinglong pants and sleeves, sleeping in well-screened rooms, using bed nets, etc.Diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis is based on clinical symptoms and serologic testing of serum or CSF. There areno antiviral drugs to treat any of these arboviral diseases, so treatment consists of supportive care and management ofsymptoms.Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is caused by eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV), which can cause severedisease in horses and humans. Birds are reservoirs for EEEV with accidental transmission to horses and humans byAedes, Coquillettidia, and Culex species of mosquitoes. Neither horses nor humans serve as reservoirs. EEE is mostcommon in US Gulf Coast and Atlantic states. EEE is one of the more severe mosquito-transmitted diseases in theUnited States, but fortunately, it is a very rare disease in the United States (Figure 26.13).[19][20]Western equine encephalitis (WEE) is caused by western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV). WEEV is usuallytransmitted to horses and humans by the Culex tarsalis mosquitoes and, in the past decade, has caused very few casesof encephalitis in humans in the United States. In humans, WEE symptoms are less severe than EEE and include19. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Disease Cases and Deaths Reported to CDC byYear and Clinical Presentation, 2004–2013,” 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/EasternEquineEncephalitis/resources/EEEV-Cases-by-Year_2004-2013.pdf.20. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis, Symptoms & Treatment, 2016,” Accessed June 29, 2016.https://www.cdc.gov/easternequineencephalitis/tech/symptoms.html.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1189fever, chills, and vomiting, with a mortality rate of 3–4%. Like EEEV, birds are the natural reservoir for WEEV.Periodically, for indeterminate reasons, epidemics in human cases have occurred in North America in the past. Thelargest on record was in 1941, with more than 3400 cases.[21]Figure 26.13 (a) A false color TEM of a mosquito salivary gland cell shows an infection of the eastern equineencephalitis virus (red). (b) CT (left) and MRI (right) scans of the brains of children with eastern equine encephalitisinfections, showing abnormalities (arrows) resulting from the infection. (credit a, b: modifications of work by theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)St. Louis encephalitis (SLE), caused by St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), is a rare form of encephalitis withsymptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected patients. The natural reservoirs for SLEV are birds. SLEV is mostoften found in the Ohio-Mississippi River basin of the central United States and was named after a severe outbreakin Missouri in 1934. The worst outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis occurred in 1975, with over 2000 cases reported.[22]Humans become infected when bitten by C. tarsalis, C. quinquefasciatus, or C. pipiens mosquitoes carrying SLEV.Most patients are asymptomatic, but in a small number of individuals, symptoms range from mild flu-like syndromesto fatal encephalitis. The overall mortality rate for symptomatic patients is 5–15%.[23]Japanese encephalitis, caused by Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), is the leading cause of vaccine-preventableencephalitis in humans and is endemic to some of the most populous countries in the world, including China,India, Japan, and all of Southeast Asia. JEV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes, usually the species C.tritaeniorhynchus. The biological reservoirs for JEV include pigs and wading birds. Most patients with JEV infectionsare asymptomatic, with symptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected individuals. However, about 25% of thosewho do develop encephalitis die, and among those who recover, 30–50% have psychiatric, neurologic, or cognitiveimpairment.[24] Fortunately, there is an effective vaccine that can prevent infection with JEV. The CDC recommendsthis vaccine for travelers who expect to spend more than one month in endemic areas.As the name suggests, West Nile virus (WNV) and its associated disease, West Nile encephalitis (WNE), did notoriginate in North America. Until 1999, it was endemic in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia; however, the first US21. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Western Equine Encephalitis—United States and Canada, 1987,” Morbidity andMortality Weekly Report 36, no. 39 (1987): 655.22. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Epidemiology & Geographic Distribution,” Accessed June30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/epi.html.23. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/symptoms.html.24. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Japanese Encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.http://www.cdc.gov/japaneseencephalitis/symptoms/index.html.1190 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5cases were identified in New York in 1999, and by 2004, the virus had spread across the entire continental UnitedStates. Over 35,000 cases, including 1400 deaths, were confirmed in the five-year period between 1999 and 2004.WNV infection remains reportable to the CDC.WNV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes from its natural reservoir, infected birds, with 70–80% ofinfected patients experiencing no symptoms. Most symptomatic cases involve only mild, flu-like symptoms, butfewer than 1% of infected people develop severe and sometimes fatal encephalitis or meningitis. The mortality rate inWNV patients who develop neurological disease is about 10%. More information about West Nile virus can be foundin Modes of Disease Transmission.This interactive map (https://www.openstax.org/l/22arboviralUS) identifiescases of several arboviral diseases in humans and reservoir species by stateand year for the United States.• Why is it unlikely that arboviral encephalitis viruses will be eradicated in the future?• Which is the most common form of viral encephalitis in the United States?Part 2Levofloxacin is a quinolone antibiotic that is often prescribed to treat bacterial infections of the respiratory tract,including pneumonia and bronchitis. But after taking the medication for a week, David returned to his physiciansicker than before. He claimed that the antibiotic had no effect on his earlier symptoms. In addition, he nowwas experiencing headaches, a stiff neck, and difficulty focusing at work. He also showed the doctor a rashthat had developed on his arms over the past week. His doctor, more concerned now, began to ask aboutDavid's activities over the past two weeks.David explained that he had been recently working on a project to disassemble an old barn. His doctorcollected sputum samples and scrapings from David’s rash for cultures. A spinal tap was also performed toexamine David’s CSF. Microscopic examination of his CSF revealed encapsulated yeast cells. Based on thisresult, the doctor prescribed a new antimicrobial therapy using amphotericin B and flucytosine.• Why was the original treatment ineffective?• Why is the presence of a capsule clinically important?Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box. Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Zika Virus InfectionZika virus infection is an emerging arboviral disease associated with human illness in Africa, Southeast Asia, andSouth and Central America; however, its range is expanding as a result of the widespread range of its mosquitovector. The first cases originating in the United States were reported in 2016.The Zika virus was initially describedLink to LearningClinical FocusChapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1191in 1947 from monkeys in the Zika Forest of Uganda through a network that monitored yellow fever. It was notconsidered a serious human pathogen until the first large-scale outbreaks occurred in Micronesia in 2007;[25] however,the virus has gained notoriety over the past decade, as it has emerged as a cause of symptoms similar to other arboviralinfections that include fever, skin rashes, conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, malaise, and headache. Mosquitoesof the Aedes genus are the primary vectors, although the virus can also be transmitted sexually, from mother to babyduring pregnancy, or through a blood transfusion.Most Zika virus infections result in mild symptoms such as fever, a slight rash, or conjunctivitis. However, infectionsin pregnant women can adversely affect the developing fetus. Reports in 2015 indicate fetal infections can result inbrain damage, including a serious birth defect called microcephaly, in which the infant is born with an abnormallysmall head (Figure 26.14).[26]Diagnosis of Zika is primarily based on clinical symptoms. However, the FDA recently authorized the use of a Zikavirus RNA assay, Trioplex RT-PCR, and Zika MAC-ELISA to test patient blood and urine to confirm Zika virusdisease. There are currently no antiviral treatments or vaccines for Zika virus, and treatment is limited to supportivecare.Figure 26.14 (a) This colorized electron micrograph shows Zika virus particles (red). (b) Women infected by the Zikavirus during pregnancy may give birth to children with microcephaly, a deformity characterized by an abnormally smallhead and brain. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What are the signs and symptoms of Zika virus infection in adults?• Why is Zika virus infection considered a serious public health threat?RabiesRabies is a deadly zoonotic disease that has been known since antiquity. The disease is caused by rabies virus(RV), a member of the family Rhabdoviridae, and is primarily transmitted through the bite of an infected mammal.Rhabdoviridae are enveloped RNA viruses that have a distinctive bullet shape (Figure 26.15); they were first studied25. Sikka, Veronica, Vijay Kumar Chattu, Raaj K. Popli, Sagar C. Galwankar, Dhanashree Kelkar, Stanley G. Sawicki, Stanislaw P.Stawicki, and Thomas J. Papadimos, “The Emergence of Zika Virus as a Global Health Security Threat: A Review and a ConsensusStatement of the INDUSEM Joint Working Group (JWG),” Journal of Global Infectious Diseases 8, no. 1 (2016): 3.26. Mlakar, Jernej, Misa Korva, Nataša Tul, Mara Popović, Mateja Poljšak-Prijatelj, Jerica Mraz, Marko Kolenc et al., “Zika VirusAssociated with Microcephaly,” New England Journal of Medicine 374, no. 10 (2016): 951-8.1192 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5by Louis Pasteur, who obtained rabies virus from rabid dogs and cultivated the virus in rabbits. He successfullyprepared a rabies vaccine using dried nerve tissues from infected animals. This vaccine was used to first treat aninfected human in 1885.The most common reservoirs in the United States are wild animals such as raccoons (30.2% of all animal cases during2014), bats (29.1%), skunks (26.3%), and foxes (4.1%); collectively, these animals were responsible for a total of92.6% of animal rabies cases in the United States in 2014. The remaining 7.4% of cases that year were in domesticatedanimals such as dogs, cats, horses, mules, sheep, goats, and llamas.[27] While there are typically only one or twohuman cases per year in the United States, rabies still causes tens of thousands of human deaths per year worldwide,primarily in Asia and Africa.The low incidence of rabies in the United States is primarily a result of the widespread vaccination of dogs andcats. An oral vaccine is also used to protect wild animals, such as raccoons and foxes, from infection. Oral vaccineprograms tend to focus on geographic areas where rabies is endemic.[28] The oral vaccine is usually delivered in apackage of bait that is dropped by airplane, although baiting in urban areas is done by hand to maximize safety.[29]Many countries require a quarantine or proof of rabies vaccination for domestic pets being brought into the country.These procedures are especially strict in island nations where rabies is not yet present, such as Australia.The incubation period for rabies can be lengthy, ranging from several weeks or months to over a year. As the virusreplicates, it moves from the site of the bite into motor and sensory axons of peripheral nerves and spreads fromnerve to nerve using a process called retrograde transport, eventually making its way to the CNS through the spinalganglia. Once rabies virus reaches the brain, the infection leads to encephalitis caused by the disruption of normalneurotransmitter function, resulting in the symptoms associated with rabies. The virions act in the synaptic spacesas competitors with a variety of neurotransmitters for acetylcholine, GABA, and glycine receptors. Thus, the actionof rabies virus is neurotoxic rather than cytotoxic. After the rabies virus infects the brain, it can continue to spreadthrough other neuronal pathways, traveling out of the CNS to tissues such as the salivary glands, where the virus canbe released. As a result, as the disease progresses the virus can be found in many other tissues, including the salivaryglands, taste buds, nasal cavity, and tears.The early symptoms of rabies include discomfort at the site of the bite, fever, and headache. Once the virus reachesthe brain and later symptoms appear, the disease is always fatal. Terminal rabies cases can end in one of two ways:either furious or paralytic rabies. Individuals with furious rabies become very agitated and hyperactive. Hydrophobia(a fear of water) is common in patients with furious rabies, which is caused by muscular spasms in the throat whenswallowing or thinking about water. Excess salivation and a desire to bite can lead to foaming of the mouth. Thesebehaviors serve to enhance the likelihood of viral transmission, although contact with infected secretions like saliva ortears alone is sufficient for infection. The disease culminates after just a few days with terror and confusion, followedby cardiovascular and respiratory arrest. In contrast, individuals with paralytic rabies generally follow a longer courseof disease. The muscles at the site of infection become paralyzed. Over a period of time, the paralysis slowly spreadsthroughout the body. This paralytic form of disease culminates in coma and death.Before present-day diagnostic methods were available, rabies diagnosis was made using a clinical case history andhistopathological examination of biopsy or autopsy tissues, looking for the presence of Negri bodies. We now knowthese histologic changes cannot be used to confirm a rabies diagnosis. There are no tests that can detect rabies virusin humans at the time of the bite or shortly thereafter. Once the virus has begun to replicate (but before clinicalsymptoms occur), the virus can be detected using an immunofluorescence test on cutaneous nerves found at the baseof hair follicles. Saliva can also be tested for viral genetic material by reverse transcription followed by polymerasechain reaction (RT-PCR). Even when these tests are performed, most suspected infections are treated as positive in the27. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Rabies, Wild Animals,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/rabies/location/usa/surveillance/wild_animals.html.28. Slate, Dennis, Charles E. Rupprecht, Jane A. Rooney, Dennis Donovan, Donald H. Lein, and Richard B. Chipman, “Status of OralRabies Vaccination in Wild Carnivores in the United States,” Virus Research 111, no. 1 (2005): 68-76.29. Finnegan, Christopher J., Sharon M. Brookes, Nicholas Johnson, Jemma Smith, Karen L. Mansfield, Victoria L. Keene, Lorraine M.McElhinney, and Anthony R. Fooks, “Rabies in North America and Europe,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 95, no. 1 (2002):9-13. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1279140/.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1193absence of contravening evidence. It is better that patients undergo unnecessary therapy because of a false-positiveresult, rather than die as the result of a false-negative result.Human rabies infections are treated by immunization with multiple doses of an attenuated vaccine to develop activeimmunity in the patient (see the Clinical Focus feature in the chapter on Acellular Pathogens). Vaccination ofan already-infected individual has the potential to work because of the slow progress of the disease, which allowstime for the patient’s immune system to develop antibodies against the virus. Patients may also be treated withhuman rabies immune globulin (antibodies to the rabies virus) to encourage passive immunity. These antibodies willneutralize any free viral particles. Although the rabies infection progresses slowly in peripheral tissues, patients arenot normally able to mount a protective immune response on their own.Figure 26.15 Virions of the rabies virus have a characteristic bullet-like shape. (credit: modification of work by theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)• How does the bite from an infected animal transmit rabies?• What is the goal of wildlife vaccination programs for rabies?• How is rabies treated in a human?PoliomyelitisPoliomyelitis (polio), caused by poliovirus, is a primarily intestinal disease that, in a small percentage of cases,proceeds to the nervous system, causing paralysis and, potentially, death. Poliovirus is highly contagious, withtransmission occurring by the fecal-oral route or by aerosol or droplet transmission. Approximately 72% of allpoliovirus infections are asymptomatic; another 25% result only in mild intestinal disease, producing nausea, fever,and headache.[30] However, even in the absence of symptoms, patients infected with the virus can shed it in feces andoral secretions, potentially transmitting the virus to others. In about one case in every 200, the poliovirus affects cellsin the CNS.[31]30. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/about/index.htm.31. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/about/index.htm.1194 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5After it enters through the mouth, initial replication of poliovirus occurs at the site of implantation in the pharynx andgastrointestinal tract. As the infection progresses, poliovirus is usually present in the throat and in the stool before theonset of symptoms. One week after the onset of symptoms, there is less poliovirus in the throat, but for several weeks,poliovirus continues to be excreted in the stool. Poliovirus invades local lymphoid tissue, enters the bloodstream, andthen may infect cells of the CNS. Replication of poliovirus in motor neurons of the anterior horn cells in the spinalcord, brain stem, or motor cortex results in cell destruction and leads to flaccid paralysis. In severe cases, this caninvolve the respiratory system, leading to death. Patients with impaired respiratory function are treated using positivepressureventilation systems. In the past, patients were sometimes confined to Emerson respirators, also known asiron lungs (Figure 26.16).Direct detection of the poliovirus from the throat or feces can be achieved using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)or genomic sequencing to identify the genotype of the poliovirus infecting the patient. Serological tests can be used todetermine whether the patient has been previously vaccinated. There are no therapeutic measures for polio; treatmentis limited to various supportive measures. These include pain relievers, rest, heat therapy to ease muscle spasms,physical therapy and corrective braces if necessary to help with walking, and mechanical ventilation to assist withbreathing if necessary.Figure 26.16 (a) An Emerson respiratory (or iron lung) that was used to help some polio victims to breathe. (b) Poliocan also result in impaired motor function. (credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Two different vaccines were introduced in the 1950s that have led to the dramatic decrease in polio worldwide(Figure 26.17). The Salk vaccine is an inactivated polio virus that was first introduced in 1955. This vaccine isdelivered by intramuscular injection. The Sabin vaccine is an oral polio vaccine that contains an attenuated virus; itwas licensed for use in 1962. There are three serotypes of poliovirus that cause disease in humans; both the Salk andthe Sabin vaccines are effective against all three.Attenuated viruses from the Sabin vaccine are shed in the feces of immunized individuals and thus have the potentialto infect nonimmunized individuals. By the late 1990s, the few polio cases originating in the United States couldbe traced back to the Sabin vaccine. In these cases, mutations of the attenuated virus following vaccination likelyallowed the microbe to revert to a virulent form. For this reason, the United States switched exclusively to the Salkvaccine in 2000. Because the Salk vaccine contains an inactivated virus, there is no risk of transmission to others (seeVaccines). Currently four doses of the vaccine are recommended for children: at 2, 4, and 6–18 months of age, andat 4–6 years of age.In 1988, WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative with the goal of eradicating polio worldwide throughimmunization. That goal is now close to being realized. Polio is now endemic in only a few countries, includingAfghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria, where vaccination efforts have been disrupted by military conflict or politicalinstability.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1195Figure 26.17 (a) Polio is caused by the poliovirus. (b) Two American virologists developed the first polio vaccines:Albert Sabin (left) and Jonas Salk (right). (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)The Terror of PolioIn the years afterWorldWar II, the United States and the Soviet Union entered a period known as the ColdWar.Although there was no armed conflict, the two super powers were diplomatically and economically isolatedfrom each other, as represented by the so-called Iron Curtain between the Soviet Union and the rest of theworld. After 1950, migration or travel outside of the Soviet Union was exceedingly difficult, and it was equallydifficult for foreigners to enter the Soviet Union. The United States also placed strict limits on Soviets enteringthe country. During the Eisenhower administration, only 20 graduate students from the Soviet Union wereallowed to come to study in the United States per year.Yet even the Iron Curtain was no match for polio. The Salk vaccine became widely available in the West in1955, and by the time the Sabin vaccine was ready for clinical trials, most of the susceptible population in theUnited States and Canada had already been vaccinated against polio. Sabin needed to look elsewhere forstudy participants. At the height of the Cold War, Mikhail Chumakov was allowed to come to the United Statesto study Sabin’s work. Likewise, Sabin, an American microbiologist, was allowed to travel to the Soviet Unionto begin clinical trials. Chumakov organized Soviet-based production and managed the experimental trials totest the new vaccine in the Soviet Union. By 1959, over ten million Soviet children had been safely treated withSabin’s vaccine.As a result of a global vaccination campaign with the Sabin vaccine, the overall incidence of polio has droppeddramatically. Today, polio has been nearly eliminated around the world and is only rarely seen in the UnitedStates. Perhaps one day soon, polio will become the third microbial disease to be eradicated from the generalpopulation [small pox and rinderpest (the cause of cattle plague) being the first two].• How is poliovirus transmitted?Micro Connections1196 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Compare the pros and cons of each of the two polio vaccines.Transmissible Spongiform EncephalopathiesAcellular infectious agents called prions are responsible for a group of related diseases known as transmissiblespongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) that occurs in humans and other animals (see Viroids, Virusoids, andPrions). All TSEs are degenerative, fatal neurological diseases that occur when brain tissue becomes infected byprions. These diseases have a slow onset; symptoms may not become apparent until after an incubation period ofyears and perhaps decades, but death usually occurs within months to a few years after the first symptoms appear.TSEs in animals include scrapie, a disease in sheep that has been known since the 1700s, and chronic wastingdisease, a disease of deer and elk in the United States and Canada. Mad cow disease is seen in cattle and can betransmitted to humans through the consumption of infected nerve tissues. Human prion diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru, a rare disease endemic to Papua New Guinea.Prions are infectious proteinaceous particles that are not viruses and do not contain nucleic acid. They are typicallytransmitted by exposure to and ingestion of infected nervous system tissues, tissue transplants, blood transfusions, orcontaminated fomites. Prion proteins are normally found in a healthy brain tissue in a form called PrPC. However, ifthis protein is misfolded into a denatured form (PrPSc), it can cause disease. Although the exact function of PrPC isnot currently understood, the protein folds into mostly alpha helices and binds copper. The rogue protein, on the otherhand, folds predominantly into beta-pleated sheets and is resistant to proteolysis. In addition, PrPSc can induce PrPCto become misfolded and produce more rogue protein (Figure 26.18).As PrPSc accumulates, it aggregates and forms fibrils within nerve cells. These protein complexes ultimately cause thecells to die. As a consequence, brain tissues of infected individuals form masses of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloidplaques that give the brain a spongy appearance, which is why these diseases are called spongiform encephalopathy(Figure 6.26). Damage to brain tissue results in a variety of neurological symptoms. Most commonly, affectedindividuals suffer from memory loss, personality changes, blurred vision, uncoordinated movements, and insomnia.These symptoms gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death.The gold standard for diagnosing TSE is the histological examination of brain biopsies for the presence ofcharacteristic amyloid plaques, vacuoles, and prion proteins. Great care must be taken by clinicians when handlingsuspected prion-infected materials to avoid becoming infected themselves. Other tissue assays search for the presenceof the 14-3-3 protein, a marker for prion diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. New assays, like RT-QuIC (realtimequaking-induced conversion), offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion proteins in tissues earlierin the course of infection. Prion diseases cannot be cured. However, some medications may help slow their progress.Medical support is focused on keeping patients as comfortable as possible despite progressive and debilitatingsymptoms.Figure 26.18 The replicative cycle of misfolded prion proteins.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1197Because prion-contaminated materials are potential sources of infection forclinical scientists and physicians, both the World Health Organization(https://www.openstax.org/l/22WHOprion) and CDC(https://www.openstax.org/l/22CDCprion) provide information to inform,educate and minimize the risk of infections due to prions.• Do prions reproduce in the conventional sense?• What is the connection between prions and the removal of animal byproducts from the food of farm animals?Acellular Infections of the Nervous SystemSerious consequences are the common thread among these neurological diseases. Several cause debilitatingparalysis, and some, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and rabies, are always or nearly always fatal. Sincefew drugs are available to combat these infections, vector control and vaccination are critical for preventionand containment. Figure 26.19 summarizes some important viral and prion infections of the nervous system.Link to LearningDisease Profile1198 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.19Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 119926.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the NervousSystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the nervous system• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the nervous systemFungal infections of the nervous system, called neuromycoses, are rare in healthy individuals. However,neuromycoses can be devastating in immunocompromised or elderly patients. Several eukaryotic parasites are alsocapable of infecting the nervous system of human hosts. Although relatively uncommon, these infections can also belife-threatening in immunocompromised individuals. In this section, we will first discuss neuromycoses, followed byparasitic infections of the nervous system.Cryptococcocal MeningitisCryptococcus neoformans is a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis. This yeast is commonly found in soilsand is particularly associated with pigeon droppings. It has a thick capsule that serves as an important virulencefactor, inhibiting clearance by phagocytosis. Most C. neoformans cases result in subclinical respiratory infectionsthat, in healthy individuals, generally resolve spontaneously with no long-term consequences (see RespiratoryMycoses). In immunocompromised patients or those with other underlying illnesses, the infection can progressto cause meningitis and granuloma formation in brain tissues. Cryptococcus antigens can also serve to inhibit cellmediatedimmunity and delayed-type hypersensitivity.Cryptococcus can be easily cultured in the laboratory and identified based on its extensive capsule (Figure 26.20).C. neoformans is frequently cultured from urine samples of patients with disseminated infections.Prolonged treatment with antifungal drugs is required to treat cryptococcal infections. Combined therapy is requiredwith amphotericin B plus flucytosine for at least 10 weeks. Many antifungal drugs have difficulty crossing the bloodbrainbarrier and have strong side effects that necessitate low doses; these factors contribute to the lengthy time oftreatment. Patients with AIDS are particularly susceptible to Cryptococcus infections because of their compromisedimmune state. AIDS patients with cryptococcosis can also be treated with antifungal drugs, but they often haverelapses; lifelong doses of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection.Figure 26.20 An India ink-negative stain of C. neoformans showing the thick capsules around the spherical yeastcells. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)1200 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Why are neuromycoses infections rare in the general population?• How is a cryptococcal infection acquired?NeuromycosesNeuromycoses typically occur only in immunocompromised individuals and usually only invade the nervoussystem after first infecting a different body system. As such, many diseases that sometimes affect the nervoussystem have already been discussed in previous chapters. Figure 26.21 presents some of the most commonfungal infections associated with neurological disease. This table includes only the neurological aspectsassociated with these diseases; it does not include characteristics associated with other body systems.Figure 26.21ResolutionDavid’s new prescription for two antifungal drugs, amphotericin B and flucytosine, proved effective, and hiscondition began to improve. Culture results from David’s sputum, skin, and CSF samples confirmed a fungalinfection. All were positive for C. neoformans. Serological tests of his tissues were also positive for the C.neoformans capsular polysaccharide antigen.Disease ProfileClinical FocusChapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1201Since C. neoformans is known to occur in bird droppings, it is likely that David had been exposed to the funguswhile working on the barn. Despite this exposure, David’s doctor explained to him that immunocompetentpeople rarely contract cryptococcal meningitis and that his immune system had likely been compromised bythe anti-inflammatory medication he was taking to treat his Crohn’s disease. However, to rule out other possiblecauses of immunodeficiency, David’s doctor recommended that he be tested for HIV.After David tested negative for HIV, his doctor took him off the corticosteroid he was using to manage hisCrohn’s disease, replacing it with a different class of drug. After several weeks of antifungal treatments, Davidmanaged a full recovery.Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box.Amoebic MeningitisPrimary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) is caused by Naegleria fowleri. This amoeboflagellate is commonlyfound free-living in soils and water. It can exist in one of three forms—the infective amoebic trophozoite form,a motile flagellate form, and a resting cyst form. PAM is a rare disease that has been associated with young andotherwise healthy individuals. Individuals are typically infected by the amoeba while swimming in warm bodies offreshwater such as rivers, lakes, and hot springs. The pathogenic trophozoite infects the brain by initially enteringthrough nasal passages to the sinuses; it then moves down olfactory nerve fibers to penetrate the submucosalnervous plexus, invades the cribriform plate, and reaches the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space is highlyvascularized and is a route of dissemination of trophozoites to other areas of the CNS, including the brain (Figure26.22). Inflammation and destruction of gray matter leads to severe headaches and fever. Within days, confusionand convulsions occur and quickly progress to seizures, coma, and death. The progression can be very rapid, and thedisease is often not diagnosed until autopsy.N. fowleri infections can be confirmed by direct observation of CSF; the amoebae can often be seen moving whileviewing a fresh CSF wet mount through a microscope. Flagellated forms can occasionally also be found in CSF. Theamoebae can be stained with several stains for identification, including Giemsa-Wright or a modified trichrome stain.Detection of antigens with indirect immunofluorescence, or genetic analysis with PCR, can be used to confirm aninitial diagnosis. N. fowleri infections are nearly always fatal; only 3 of 138 patients with PAM in the United Stateshave survived.[32] A new experimental drug called miltefosine shows some promise for treating these infections.This drug is a phosphotidylcholine derivative that is thought to inhibit membrane function in N. fowleri, triggeringapoptosis and disturbance of lipid-dependent cell signaling pathways.[33] When administered early in infection andcoupled with therapeutic hypothermia (lowering the body’s core temperature to reduce the cerebral edema associatedwith infection), this drug has been successfully used to treat primary amoebic encephalitis.32. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Naegleria fowleri—Primary Amoebic Meningoencephalitis (PAM)—AmebicEncephalitis,” 2016. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/naegleria/treatment.html.33. Dorlo, Thomas PC, Manica Balasegaram, Jos H. Beijnen, and Peter J. de Vries, “Miltefosine: A Review of Its Pharmacology andTherapeutic Efficacy in the Treatment of Leishmaniasis,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 67, no. 11 (2012): 2576-97.1202 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.22 Free-living amoeba in human brain tissue from a patient suffering from PAM. (credit: modification ofwork by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Granulomatous Amoebic EncephalitisAcanthamoeba and Balamuthia species are free-living amoebae found in many bodies of fresh water. Humaninfections by these amoebae are rare. However, they can cause amoebic keratitis in contact lens wearers (seeProtozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Eyes), disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients,and granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE) in severe cases. Compared to PAM, GAE tend to be subacuteinfections. The microbe is thought to enter through either the nasal sinuses or breaks in the skin. It is disseminatedhematogenously and can invade the CNS. There, the infections lead to inflammation, formation of lesions, anddevelopment of typical neurological symptoms of encephalitis (Figure 26.23). GAE is nearly always fatal.GAE is often not diagnosed until late in the infection. Lesions caused by the infection can be detected using CT orMRI. The live amoebae can be directly detected in CSF or tissue biopsies. Serological tests are available but generallyare not necessary to make a correct diagnosis, since the presence of the organism in CSF is definitive. Some antifungaldrugs, like fluconazole, have been used to treat acanthamoebal infections. In addition, a combination of miltefosineand voriconazole (an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis) has recently been used to successfully treat GAE. Even withtreatment, however, the mortality rate for patients with these infections is high.Figure 26.23 (a) Brain tissue from a patient who died of granulomatous amebic encephalitis (GAE) caused byBalamuthia mandrillaris. (b) A close-up of the necrosis in the center of the brain section. (credit a, b: modifications ofwork by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1203• How is granulomatous amoebic encephalitis diagnosed?Human African TrypanosomiasisHuman African trypanosomiasis (also known as African sleeping sickness) is a serious disease endemic to twodistinct regions in sub-Saharan Africa. It is caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei. Thesubspecies Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense causes East African trypanosomiasis (EAT), and another subspecies,Trypanosoma brucei gambiense causes West African trypanosomiasis (WAT). A few hundred cases of EAT arecurrently reported each year.[34] WAT is more commonly reported and tends to be a more chronic disease. Around7000 to 10,000 new cases of WAT are identified each year.[35]T. brucei is primarily transmitted to humans by the bite of the tsetse fly (Glossina spp.). Soon after the bite of a tsetsefly, a chancre forms at the site of infection. The flagellates then spread, moving into the circulatory system (Figure26.24). These systemic infections result in an undulating fever, during which symptoms persist for two or three dayswith remissions of about a week between bouts. As the disease enters its final phase, the pathogens move from thelymphatics into the CNS. Neurological symptoms include daytime sleepiness, insomnia, and mental deterioration. InEAT, the disease runs its course over a span of weeks to months. In contrast, WAT often occurs over a span of monthsto years.Although a strong immune response is mounted against the trypanosome, it is not sufficient to eliminate the pathogen.Through antigenic variation, Trypanosoma can change their surface proteins into over 100 serological types. Thisvariation leads to the undulating form of the initial disease. The initial septicemia caused by the infection leads tohigh fevers. As the immune system responds to the infection, the number of organisms decrease, and the clinicalsymptoms abate. However, a subpopulation of the pathogen then alters its surface coat antigens by antigenic variationand evades the immune response. These flagellates rapidly proliferate and cause another bout of disease. If untreated,these infections are usually fatal.Clinical symptoms can be used to recognize the early signs of African trypanosomiasis. These include the formationof a chancre at the site of infection andWinterbottom’s sign.Winterbottom’s sign refers to the enlargement of lymphnodes on the back of the neck—often indicative of cerebral infections. Trypanosoma can be directly observed instained samples including blood, lymph, CSF, and skin biopsies of chancres from patients. Antibodies against theparasite are found in most patients with acute or chronic disease. Serologic testing is generally not used for diagnosis,however, since the microscopic detection of the parasite is sufficient. Early diagnosis is important for treatment.Before the nervous system is involved, drugs like pentamidine (an inhibitor of nuclear metabolism) and suramin(mechanism unclear) can be used. These drugs have fewer side effects than the drugs needed to treat the secondstage of the disease. Once the sleeping sickness phase has begun, harsher drugs including melarsoprol (an arsenicderivative) and eflornithine can be effective. Following successful treatment, patients still need to have follow-upexaminations of their CSF for two years to detect possible relapses of the disease. The most effective means ofpreventing these diseases is to control the insect vector populations.34. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness), East AfricanTrypanosomiasis FAQs,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/gen_info/faqs-east.html.35. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness),Epidemiology & Risk Factors,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/epi.html.1204 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.24 Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, in a human blood smear.(credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the symptom of a systemic Trypanosoma infection?• What are the symptoms of a neurological Trypanosoma infection?• Why are trypanosome infections so difficult to eradicate?NeurotoxoplasmosisToxoplasma gondii is an ubiquitous intracellular parasite that can cause neonatal infections. Cats are the definitivehost, and humans can become infected after eating infected meat or, more commonly, by ingesting oocysts shed inthe feces of cats (see Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems). T. gondii entersthe circulatory system by passing between the endothelial cells of blood vessels.[36] Most cases of toxoplasmosisare asymptomatic. However, in immunocompromised patients, neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infectionsare one of the most common causes of brain abscesses.[37] The organism is able to cross the blood-brain barrier byinfecting the endothelial cells of capillaries in the brain. The parasite reproduces within these cells, a step that appearsto be necessary for entry to the brain, and then causes the endothelial cell to lyse, releasing the progeny into braintissues. This mechanism is quite different than the method it uses to enter the bloodstream in the first place.[38]The brain lesions associated with neurotoxoplasmosis can be detected radiographically using MRI or CAT scans(Figure 26.25). Diagnosis can be confirmed by direct observation of the organism in CSF. RT-PCR assays can alsobe used to detect T. gondii through genetic markers.Treatment of neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections requires six weeks of multi-drug therapy withpyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and folinic acid. Long-term maintenance doses are often required to prevent recurrence.36. Carruthers, Vern B., and Yasuhiro Suzuki, “Effects of Toxoplasma gondii Infection on the Brain,” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, no. 3(2007): 745-51.37. Uppal, Gulshan, “CNS Toxoplasmosis in HIV,” 2015. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1167298-overview#a3.38. Konradt, Christoph, Norikiyo Ueno, David A. Christian, Jonathan H. Delong, Gretchen Harms Pritchard, Jasmin Herz, David J. Bzik etal., “Endothelial Cells Are a Replicative Niche for Entry of Toxoplasma gondii to the Central Nervous System,” Nature Microbiology 1(2016): 16001.Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1205Figure 26.25 This Toxoplasma gondii cyst, observed in mouse brain tissue, contains thousands of inactiveparasites. (credit: modification of work by USDA)• Under what conditions is Toxoplasma infection serious?• How does Toxoplasma circumvent the blood-brain barrier?NeurocysticercosisCysticercosis is a parasitic infection caused by the larval form of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium. When the larvaeinvade the brain and spinal cord, the condition is referred to as neurocysticercosis. This condition affects millions ofpeople worldwide and is the leading cause of adult onset epilepsy in the developing world.[39]The life cycle of T. solium is discussed in Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract. Followingingestion, the eggs hatch in the intestine to form larvae called cysticerci. Adult tapeworms form in the small intestineand produce eggs that are shed in the feces. These eggs can infect other individuals through fecal contaminationof food or other surfaces. Eggs can also hatch within the intestine of the original patient and lead to an ongoingautoinfection. The cystercerci, can migrate to the blood and invade many tissues in the body, including the CNS.Neurocysticercosis is usually diagnosed through noninvasive techniques. Epidemiological information can be used asan initial screen; cysticercosis is endemic in Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. Radiological imaging (MRIand CT scans) is the primary method used to diagnose neurocysticercosis; imaging can be used to detect the one- totwo-centimeter cysts that form around the parasites (Figure 26.26). Elevated levels of eosinophils in the blood canalso indicate a parasitic infection. EIA and ELISA are also used to detect antigens associated with the pathogen.39. DeGiorgio, Christopher M., Marco T. Medina, Reyna Durón, Chi Zee, and Susan Pietsch Escueta, “Neurocysticercosis,” EpilepsyCurrents 4, no. 3 (2004): 107-11.1206 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 26.26 Brain CT scans of sagittal (left) and axial (right) sections of a brain with neurocysticercosis. Numerouscysts are visible in both images, as indicated by the arrows. (credit: modification of work by Segamwenge IL, KiokoNP)The treatment for neurocysticercosis depends on the location, number, size, and stage of cysticerci present.Antihelminthic chemotherapy includes albendazole and praziquantel. Because these drugs kill viable cysts, theymay acutely increase symptoms by provoking an inflammatory response caused by the release of Taenia cysticerciantigens, as the cysts are destroyed by the drugs. To alleviate this response, corticosteroids that cross the blood-brainbarrier (e.g., dexamethasone) can be used to mitigate these effects. Surgical intervention may be required to removeintraventricular cysts.Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous SystemParasites that successfully invade the nervous system can cause a wide range of neurological signs andsymptoms. Often, they inflict lesions that can be visualized through radiologic imaging. A number of theseinfections are fatal, but some can be treated (with varying levels of success) by antimicrobial drugs (Figure26.27).Disease ProfileChapter 26 | Nervous System Infections 1207Figure 26.27• What neurological condition is associated with neurocysticercosis?• How is neurocysticercosis diagnosed?Summary26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System• The nervous system consists of two subsystems: the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system.• The skull and three meninges (the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater) protect the brain.• Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells and neurons.• Since the blood-brain barrier excludes most microbes, there is no normal microbiota in the CNS.• Some pathogens have specific virulence factors that allow them to breach the blood-brain barrier.Inflammation of the brain or meninges caused by infection is called encephalitis or meningitis, respectively.1208 Chapter 26 | Nervous System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5These conditions can lead to blindness, deafness, coma, and death.26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System• Bacterial meningitis can be caused by several species of encapsulated bacteria, including Haemophilusinfluenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Streptococcus agalactiae (group Bstreptococci). H. influenzae affects primarily young children and neonates, N. meningitidis is the onlycommunicable pathogen and mostly affects children and young adults, S. pneumoniae affects mostly youngchildren, and S. agalactiae affects newborns during or shortly after birth.• Symptoms of bacterial meningitis include fever, neck stiffness, headache, confusion, convulsions, coma, anddeath.• Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is made through observations and culture of organisms in CSF. Bacterialmeningitis is treated with antibiotics. H. influenzae and N. meningitidis have vaccines available.• Clostridium species cause neurological diseases, including botulism and tetanus, by producing potentneurotoxins that interfere with neurotransmitter release. The PNS is typically affected. Treatment ofClostridium infection is effective only through early diagnosis with administration of antibiotics to control theinfection and antitoxins to neutralize the endotoxin before they enter cells.• Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen that can infect the CNS, causing meningitis. The infectioncan be spread through the placenta to a fetus. Diagnosis is through culture of blood or CSF. Treatment is withantibiotics and there is no vaccine.• Hansen’s disease (leprosy) is caused by the intracellular parasite Mycobacterium leprae. Infections causedemylenation of neurons, resulting in decreased sensation in peripheral appendages and body sites. Treatmentis with multi-drug antibiotic therapy, and there is no universally recognized vaccine.26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System• Viral meningitis is more common and generally less severe than bacterial menigitis. It can result fromsecondary sequelae of many viruses or be caused by infections of arboviruses.• Various types of arboviral encephalitis are concentrated in particular geographic locations throughout theworld. These mosquito-borne viral infections of the nervous system are typically mild, but they can be lifethreateningin some cases.• Zika virus is an emerging arboviral infection with generally mild symptoms in most individuals, butinfections of pregnant women can cause the birth defect microcephaly.• Polio is typically a mild intestinal infection but can be damaging or fatal if it progresses to a neurologicaldisease.• Rabies is nearly always fatal when untreated and remains a significant problem worldwide.• Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru are caused byprions. These diseases are untreatable and ultimately fatal. Similar prion diseases are found in animals.26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System• Neuromycoses are uncommon in immunocompetent people, but immunocompromised individuals withfungal infections have high mortality rates. Treatment of neuromycoses require prolonged therapy withantifungal drugs at low doses to avoid side effects and overcome the effect of the blood-brain barrier.• Some protist infections of the nervous systems are fatal if not treated, including primary amoebic meningitis,granulomatous amoebic encephalitis, human African trypanosomiasis, and neurotoxoplasmosis.• The various forms of ameobic encephalitis caused by the different amoebic infections are typically fatal evenwith treatment, but they are rare.• African trypanosomiasis is a serious but treatable disease endemic to two distinct regions in sub-SaharanAfrica caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei.• Neurocysticercosis is treated using antihelminthic drugs or surgery to remove the large cysts from the CNS.