Chapter 17Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesFigure 17.1 Varicella, or chickenpox, is caused by the highly contagious varicella-zoster virus. The characteristicrash seen here is partly a result of inflammation associated with the body’s immune response to the virus.Inflammation is a response mechanism of innate immunity that helps the body fight off a wide range of infections.(credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chapter Outline17.1 Physical Defenses17.2 Chemical Defenses17.3 Cellular Defenses17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis17.5 Inflammation and FeverIntroductionDespite relatively constant exposure to pathogenic microbes in the environment, humans do not generally suffer fromconstant infection or disease. Under most circumstances, the body is able to defend itself from the threat of infectionthanks to a complex immune system designed to repel, kill, and expel disease-causing invaders. Immunity as a wholecan be described as two interrelated parts: nonspecific innate immunity, which is the subject of this chapter, andspecific adaptive host defenses, which are discussed in the next chapter.The nonspecific innate immune response provides a first line of defense that can often prevent infections from gaininga solid foothold in the body. These defenses are described as nonspecific because they do not target any specificpathogen; rather, they defend against a wide range of potential pathogens. They are called innate because they arebuilt-in mechanisms of the human organism. Unlike the specific adaptive defenses, they are not acquired over timeand they have no “memory” (they do not improve after repeated exposures to specific pathogens).Broadly speaking, nonspecific innate defenses provide an immediate (or very rapid) response against potentialpathogens. However, these responses are neither perfect nor impenetrable. They can be circumvented by pathogenson occasion, and sometimes they can even cause damage to the body, contributing to the signs and symptoms ofChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 735infection (Figure 17.1).17.1 Physical DefensesLearning Objectives• Describe the various physical barriers and mechanical defenses that protect the human body against infectionand disease• Describe the role of microbiota as a first-line defense against infection and diseaseNonspecific innate immunity can be characterized as a multifaceted system of defenses that targets invadingpathogens in a nonspecific manner. In this chapter, we have divided the numerous defenses that make up this systeminto three categories: physical defenses, chemical defenses, and cellular defenses. However, it is important to keepin mind that these defenses do not function independently, and the categories often overlap. Table 17.1 provides anoverview of the nonspecific defenses discussed in this chapter.Overview of Nonspecific Innate Immune DefensesPhysical barriersPhysical defenses Mechanical defensesMicrobiomeChemicals and enzymes in body fluidsAntimicrobial peptidesPlasma protein mediatorsCytokinesChemical defensesInflammation-eliciting mediatorsGranulocytesCellular defensesAgranulocytesTable 17.1Physical defenses provide the body’s most basic form of nonspecific defense. They include physical barriers toPart 1Angela, a 25-year-old female patient in the emergency department, is having some trouble communicatingverbally because of shortness of breath. A nurse observes constriction and swelling of the airway and laboredbreathing. The nurse asks Angela if she has a history of asthma or allergies. Angela shakes her head no, butthere is fear in her eyes. With some difficulty, she explains that her father died suddenly at age 27, when shewas just a little girl, of a similar respiratory attack. The underlying cause had never been identified.• What are some possible causes of constriction and swelling of the airway?• What causes swelling of body tissues in general?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus736 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5microbes, such as the skin and mucous membranes, as well as mechanical defenses that physically remove microbesand debris from areas of the body where they might cause harm or infection. In addition, the microbiome providesa measure of physical protection against disease, as microbes of the normal microbiota compete with pathogens fornutrients and cellular binding sites necessary to cause infection.Physical BarriersPhysical barriers play an important role in preventing microbes from reaching tissues that are susceptible to infection.At the cellular level, barriers consist of cells that are tightly joined to prevent invaders from crossing through todeeper tissue. For example, the endothelial cells that line blood vessels have very tight cell-to-cell junctions, blockingmicrobes from gaining access to the bloodstream. Cell junctions are generally composed of cell membrane proteinsthat may connect with the extracellular matrix or with complementary proteins from neighboring cells. Tissues invarious parts of the body have different types of cell junctions. These include tight junctions, desmosomes, andgap junctions, as illustrated in Figure 17.2. Invading microorganisms may attempt to break down these substanceschemically, using enzymes such as proteases that can cause structural damage to create a point of entry for pathogens.Figure 17.2 There are multiple types of cell junctions in human tissue, three of which are shown here. Tightjunctions rivet two adjacent cells together, preventing or limiting material exchange through the spaces betweenthem. Desmosomes have intermediate fibers that act like shoelaces, tying two cells together, allowing small materialsto pass through the resulting spaces. Gap junctions are channels between two cells that permit their communicationvia signals. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)The Skin BarrierOne of the body’s most important physical barriers is the skin barrier, which is composed of three layers of closelypacked cells. The thin upper layer is called the epidermis. A second, thicker layer, called the dermis, contains hairfollicles, sweat glands, nerves, and blood vessels. A layer of fatty tissue called the hypodermis lies beneath the dermisand contains blood and lymph vessels (Figure 17.3).Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 737Figure 17.3 Human skin has three layers, the epidermis, the dermis, and the hypodermis, which provide a thickbarrier between microbes outside the body and deeper tissues. Dead skin cells on the surface of the epidermis arecontinually shed, taking with them microbes on the skin’s surface. (credit: modification of work by National Institutesof Health)The topmost layer of skin, the epidermis, consists of cells that are packed with keratin. These dead cells remain asa tightly connected, dense layer of protein-filled cell husks on the surface of the skin. The keratin makes the skin’ssurface mechanically tough and resistant to degradation by bacterial enzymes. Fatty acids on the skin’s surface createa dry, salty, and acidic environment that inhibits the growth of some microbes and is highly resistant to breakdown bybacterial enzymes. In addition, the dead cells of the epidermis are frequently shed, along with any microbes that maybe clinging to them. Shed skin cells are continually replaced with new cells from below, providing a new barrier thatwill soon be shed in the same way.Infections can occur when the skin barrier is compromised or broken. A wound can serve as a point of entry foropportunistic pathogens, which can infect the skin tissue surrounding the wound and possibly spread to deeper tissues.Every Rose Has its ThornMike, a gardener from southern California, recently noticed a small red bump on his left forearm. Initially, hedid not think much of it, but soon it grew larger and then ulcerated (opened up), becoming a painful lesion thatextended across a large part of his forearm (Figure 17.4). He went to an urgent care facility, where a physicianasked about his occupation. When he said he was a landscaper, the physician immediately suspected acase of sporotrichosis, a type of fungal infection known as rose gardener’s disease because it often afflictslandscapers and gardening enthusiasts.Under most conditions, fungi cannot produce skin infections in healthy individuals. Fungi grow filaments knownas hyphae, which are not particularly invasive and can be easily kept at bay by the physical barriers of the skinand mucous membranes. However, small wounds in the skin, such as those caused by thorns, can provide anopening for opportunistic pathogens like Sporothrix schenkii, a soil-dwelling fungus and the causative agentof rose gardener’s disease. Once it breaches the skin barrier, S. schenkii can infect the skin and underlyingtissues, producing ulcerated lesions like Mike’s. Compounding matters, other pathogens may enter the infectedCase in Point738 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5tissue, causing secondary bacterial infections.Luckily, rose gardener’s disease is treatable. Mike’s physician wrote him a prescription for some antifungaldrugs as well as a course of antibiotics to combat secondary bacterial infections. His lesions eventually healed,and Mike returned to work with a new appreciation for gloves and protective clothing.Figure 17.4 Rose gardener’s disease can occur when the fungus Sporothrix schenkii breaches the skinthrough small cuts, such as might be inflicted by thorns. (credit left: modification of work by Elisa Self; creditright: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Mucous MembranesThe mucous membranes lining the nose, mouth, lungs, and urinary and digestive tracts provide another nonspecificbarrier against potential pathogens. Mucous membranes consist of a layer of epithelial cells bound by tight junctions.The epithelial cells secrete a moist, sticky substance called mucus, which covers and protects the more fragilecell layers beneath it and traps debris and particulate matter, including microbes. Mucus secretions also containantimicrobial peptides.In many regions of the body, mechanical actions serve to flush mucus (along with trapped or dead microbes) out of thebody or away from potential sites of infection. For example, in the respiratory system, inhalation can bring microbes,dust, mold spores, and other small airborne debris into the body. This debris becomes trapped in the mucus lining therespiratory tract, a layer known as the mucociliary blanket. The epithelial cells lining the upper parts of the respiratorytract are called ciliated epithelial cells because they have hair-like appendages known as cilia. Movement of the ciliapropels debris-laden mucus out and away from the lungs. The expelled mucus is then swallowed and destroyed inthe stomach, or coughed up, or sneezed out (Figure 17.5). This system of removal is often called the mucociliaryescalator.Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 739Figure 17.5 This scanning electron micrograph shows ciliated and nonciliated epithelial cells from the humantrachea. The mucociliary escalator pushes mucus away from the lungs, along with any debris or microorganisms thatmay be trapped in the sticky mucus, and the mucus moves up to the esophagus where it can be removed byswallowing.The mucociliary escalator is such an effective barrier to microbes that the lungs, the lowermost (and most sensitive)portion of the respiratory tract, were long considered to be a sterile environment in healthy individuals. Only recentlyhas research suggested that healthy lungs may have a small normal microbiota. Disruption of the mucociliaryescalator by the damaging effects of smoking or diseases such as cystic fibrosis can lead to increased colonization ofbacteria in the lower respiratory tract and frequent infections, which highlights the importance of this physical barrierto host defenses.Like the respiratory tract, the digestive tract is a portal of entry through which microbes enter the body, and themucous membranes lining the digestive tract provide a nonspecific physical barrier against ingested microbes. Theintestinal tract is lined with epithelial cells, interspersed with mucus-secreting goblet cells (Figure 17.6). This mucusmixes with material received from the stomach, trapping foodborne microbes and debris. The mechanical action ofperistalsis, a series of muscular contractions in the digestive tract, moves the sloughed mucus and other materialthrough the intestines, rectum, and anus, excreting the material in feces.740 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 17.6 Goblet cells produce and secrete mucus. The arrows in this micrograph point to the mucus-secretinggoblet cells (magnification 1600⨯) in the intestinal epithelium. (credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by theRegents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)EndotheliaThe epithelial cells lining the urogenital tract, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and certain other tissues are knownas endothelia. These tightly packed cells provide a particularly effective frontline barrier against invaders. Theendothelia of the blood-brain barrier, for example, protect the central nervous system (CNS), which consists ofthe brain and the spinal cord. The CNS is one of the most sensitive and important areas of the body, as microbialinfection of the CNS can quickly lead to serious and often fatal inflammation. The cell junctions in the blood vesselstraveling through the CNS are some of the tightest and toughest in the body, preventing any transient microbes in thebloodstream from entering the CNS. This keeps the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds and bathes the brain and spinalcord sterile under normal conditions.• Describe how the mucociliary escalator functions.• Name two places you would find endothelia.Mechanical DefensesIn addition to physical barriers that keep microbes out, the body has a number of mechanical defenses that physicallyremove pathogens from the body, preventing them from taking up residence. We have already discussed severalexamples of mechanical defenses, including the shedding of skin cells, the expulsion of mucus via the mucociliaryescalator, and the excretion of feces through intestinal peristalsis. Other important examples of mechanical defensesinclude the flushing action of urine and tears, which both serve to carry microbes away from the body. The flushingaction of urine is largely responsible for the normally sterile environment of the urinary tract, which includes theChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 741kidneys, ureters, and urinary bladder. Urine passing out of the body washes out transient microorganisms, preventingthem from taking up residence. The eyes also have physical barriers and mechanical mechanisms for preventinginfections. The eyelashes and eyelids prevent dust and airborne microorganisms from reaching the surface of the eye.Any microbes or debris that make it past these physical barriers may be flushed out by the mechanical action ofblinking, which bathes the eye in tears, washing debris away (Figure 17.7).Figure 17.7 Tears flush microbes away from the surface of the eye. Urine washes microbes out of the urinary tractas it passes through; as a result, the urinary system is normally sterile.• Name two mechanical defenses that protect the eyes.MicrobiomeIn various regions of the body, resident microbiota serve as an important first-line defense against invading pathogens.Through their occupation of cellular binding sites and competition for available nutrients, the resident microbiotaprevent the critical early steps of pathogen attachment and proliferation required for the establishment of an infection.For example, in the vagina, members of the resident microbiota compete with opportunistic pathogens like the yeastCandida. This competition prevents infections by limiting the availability of nutrients, thus inhibiting the growth ofCandida, keeping its population in check. Similar competitions occur between the microbiota and potential pathogenson the skin, in the upper respiratory tract, and in the gastrointestinal tract. As will be discussed later in this chapter,the resident microbiota also contribute to the chemical defenses of the innate nonspecific host defenses.742 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The importance of the normal microbiota in host defenses is highlighted by the increased susceptibility to infectiousdiseases when the microbiota is disrupted or eliminated. Treatment with antibiotics can significantly deplete thenormal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract, providing an advantage for pathogenic bacteria to colonize and causediarrheal infection. In the case of diarrhea caused by Clostridium difficile, the infection can be severe and potentiallylethal. One strategy for treating C. difficile infections is fecal transplantation, which involves the transfer of fecalmaterial from a donor (screened for potential pathogens) into the intestines of the recipient patient as a method ofrestoring the normal microbiota and combating C. difficile infections.Table 17.2 provides a summary of the physical defenses discussed in this section.Physical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate ImmunityDefense Examples FunctionCellularbarriersSkin, mucous membranes, endothelial cells Deny entry to pathogensMechanicaldefensesShedding of skin cells, mucociliary sweeping, peristalsis,flushing action of urine and tearsRemove pathogens from potentialsites of infectionMicrobiome Resident bacteria of the skin, upper respiratory tract,gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tractCompete with pathogens for cellularbinding sites and nutrientsTable 17.2• List two ways resident microbiota defend against pathogens.17.2 Chemical DefensesLearning Objectives• Describe how enzymes in body fluids provide protection against infection or disease• List and describe the function of antimicrobial peptides, complement components, cytokines, and acute-phaseproteins• Describe similarities and differences among classic, alternate, and lectin complement pathwaysIn addition to physical defenses, the innate nonspecific immune system uses a number of chemical mediators thatinhibit microbial invaders. The term “chemical mediators” encompasses a wide array of substances found in variousbody fluids and tissues throughout the body. Chemical mediators may work alone or in conjunction with each otherto inhibit microbial colonization and infection.Some chemical mediators are endogenously produced, meaning they are produced by human body cells; others areproduced exogenously, meaning that they are produced by certain microbes that are part of the microbiome. Somemediators are produced continually, bathing the area in the antimicrobial substance; others are produced or activatedprimarily in response to some stimulus, such as the presence of microbes.Chemical and Enzymatic Mediators Found in Body FluidsFluids produced by the skin include examples of both endogenous and exogenous mediators. Sebaceous glands inthe dermis secrete an oil called sebum that is released onto the skin surface through hair follicles. This sebum isChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 743an endogenous mediator, providing an additional layer of defense by helping seal off the pore of the hair follicle,preventing bacteria on the skin’s surface from invading sweat glands and surrounding tissue (Figure 17.8). Certainmembers of the microbiome, such as the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes and the fungus Malassezia, amongothers, can use lipase enzymes to degrade sebum, using it as a food source. This produces oleic acid, which createsa mildly acidic environment on the surface of the skin that is inhospitable to many pathogenic microbes. Oleic acidis an example of an exogenously produced mediator because it is produced by resident microbes and not directly bybody cells.Figure 17.8 Sebaceous glands secrete sebum, a chemical mediator that lubricates and protect the skin frominvading microbes. Sebum is also a food source for resident microbes that produce oleic acid, an exogenouslyproduced mediator. (credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School© 2012)Environmental factors that affect the microbiota of the skin can have a direct impact on the production of chemicalmediators. Low humidity or decreased sebum production, for example, could make the skin less habitable formicrobes that produce oleic acid, thus making the skin more susceptible to pathogens normally inhibited by the skin’slow pH. Many skin moisturizers are formulated to counter such effects by restoring moisture and essential oils to theskin.The digestive tract also produces a large number of chemical mediators that inhibit or kill microbes. In the oralcavity, saliva contains mediators such as lactoperoxidase enzymes, and mucus secreted by the esophagus containsthe antibacterial enzyme lysozyme. In the stomach, highly acidic gastric fluid kills most microbes. In the lowerdigestive tract, the intestines have pancreatic and intestinal enzymes, antibacterial peptides (cryptins), bile producedfrom the liver, and specialized Paneth cells that produce lysozyme. Together, these mediators are able to eliminatemost pathogens that manage to survive the acidic environment of the stomach.In the urinary tract, urine flushes microbes out of the body during urination. Furthermore, the slight acidity of urine(the average pH is about 6) inhibits the growth of many microbes and potential pathogens in the urinary tract.The female reproductive system employs lactate, an exogenously produced chemical mediator, to inhibit microbialgrowth. The cells and tissue layers composing the vagina produce glycogen, a branched and more complex polymerof glucose. Lactobacilli in the area ferment glycogen to produce lactate, lowering the pH in the vagina and inhibitingtransient microbiota, opportunistic pathogens like Candida (a yeast associated with vaginal infections), and otherpathogens responsible for sexually transmitted diseases.In the eyes, tears contain the chemical mediators lysozyme and lactoferrin, both of which are capable of eliminatingmicrobes that have found their way to the surface of the eyes. Lysozyme cleaves the bond between NAG and NAM744 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5in peptidoglycan, a component of the cell wall in bacteria. It is more effective against gram-positive bacteria, whichlack the protective outer membrane associated with gram-negative bacteria. Lactoferrin inhibits microbial growth bychemically binding and sequestering iron. This effectually starves many microbes that require iron for growth.In the ears, cerumen (earwax) exhibits antimicrobial properties due to the presence of fatty acids, which lower the pHto between 3 and 5.The respiratory tract uses various chemical mediators in the nasal passages, trachea, and lungs. The mucus producedin the nasal passages contains a mix of antimicrobial molecules similar to those found in tears and saliva (e.g.,lysozyme, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase). Secretions in the trachea and lungs also contain lysozyme and lactoferrin, aswell as a diverse group of additional chemical mediators, such as the lipoprotein complex called surfactant, which hasantibacterial properties.• Explain the difference between endogenous and exogenous mediators• Describe how pH affects antimicrobial defensesAntimicrobial PeptidesThe antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a special class of nonspecific cell-derived mediators with broad-spectrumantimicrobial properties. Some AMPs are produced routinely by the body, whereas others are primarily produced (orproduced in greater quantities) in response to the presence of an invading pathogen. Research has begun exploringhow AMPs can be used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.AMPs may induce cell damage in microorganisms in a variety of ways, including by inflicting damage to membranes,destroying DNA and RNA, or interfering with cell-wall synthesis. Depending on the specific antimicrobialmechanism, a particular AMP may inhibit only certain groups of microbes (e.g., gram-positive or gram-negativebacteria) or it may be more broadly effective against bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses. Many AMPs are found onthe skin, but they can also be found in other regions of the body.A family of AMPs called defensins can be produced by epithelial cells throughout the body as well as by cellulardefenses such as macrophages and neutrophils (see Cellular Defenses). Defensins may be secreted or act insidehost cells; they combat microorganisms by damaging their plasma membranes. AMPs called bacteriocins areproduced exogenously by certain members of the resident microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract. The genescoding for these types of AMPs are often carried on plasmids and can be passed between different species within theresident microbiota through lateral or horizontal gene transfer.There are numerous other AMPs throughout the body. The characteristics of a few of the more significant AMPs aresummarized in Table 17.3.Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)AMP Secreted by Body site PathogensinhibitedMode of actionBacteriocins Resident microbiota GastrointestinaltractBacteria Disrupt membraneCathelicidin Epithelial cells,macrophages, and othercell typesSkin Bacteria andfungiDisrupts membraneTable 17.3Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 745Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)AMP Secreted by Body site PathogensinhibitedMode of actionDefensins Epithelial cells,macrophages, neutrophilsThroughout thebodyFungi, bacteria,and many virusesDisrupt membraneDermicidin Sweat glands Skin Bacteria andfungiDisrupts membraneintegrity and ionchannelsHistatins Salivary glands Oral cavity Fungi Disrupt intracellularfunctionTable 17.3• Why are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) considered nonspecific defenses?Plasma Protein MediatorsMany nonspecific innate immune factors are found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood. Plasma contains electrolytes,sugars, lipids, and proteins, each of which helps to maintain homeostasis (i.e., stable internal body functioning), andcontains the proteins involved in the clotting of blood. Additional proteins found in blood plasma, such as acute-phaseproteins, complement proteins, and cytokines, are involved in the nonspecific innate immune response.Plasma versus SerumThere are two terms for the fluid portion of blood: plasma and serum. How do they differ if they are both fluidand lack cells? The fluid portion of blood left over after coagulation (blood cell clotting) has taken place isserum. Although molecules such as many vitamins, electrolytes, certain sugars, complement proteins, andantibodies are still present in serum, clotting factors are largely depleted. Plasma, conversely, still containsall the clotting elements. To obtain plasma from blood, an anticoagulant must be used to prevent clotting.Examples of anticoagulants include heparin and ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Because clotting isinhibited, once obtained, the sample must be gently spun down in a centrifuge. The heavier, denser blood cellsform a pellet at the bottom of a centrifuge tube, while the fluid plasma portion, which is lighter and less dense,remains above the cell pellet.Acute-Phase ProteinsThe acute-phase proteins are another class of antimicrobial mediators. Acute-phase proteins are primarily producedin the liver and secreted into the blood in response to inflammatory molecules from the immune system. Examplesof acute-phase proteins include C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, ferritin, transferrin, fibrinogen, and mannosebindinglectin. Each of these proteins has a different chemical structure and inhibits or destroys microbes in some way(Table 17.4).Micro Connections746 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Some Acute-Phase Proteins and Their FunctionsC-reactive proteinSerum amyloid ACoats bacteria (opsonization), preparing them for ingestion by phagocytesFerritinTransferrinBind and sequester iron, thereby inhibiting the growth of pathogensFibrinogen Involved in formation of blood clots that trap bacterial pathogensMannose-binding lectin Activates complement cascadeTable 17.4The Complement SystemThe complement system is a group of plasma protein mediators that can act as an innate nonspecific defense whilealso serving to connect innate and adaptive immunity (discussed in the next chapter). The complement system iscomposed of more than 30 proteins (including C1 through C9) that normally circulate as precursor proteins in blood.These precursor proteins become activated when stimulated or triggered by a variety of factors, including the presenceof microorganisms. Complement proteins are considered part of innate nonspecific immunity because they are alwayspresent in the blood and tissue fluids, allowing them to be activated quickly. Also, when activated through thealternative pathway (described later in this section), complement proteins target pathogens in a nonspecific manner.The process by which circulating complement precursors become functional is called complement activation. Thisprocess is a cascade that can be triggered by one of three different mechanisms, known as the alternative, classical,and lectin pathways.The alternative pathway is initiated by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein C3. The hydrolysis ofC3 produces two products, C3a and C3b. When no invader microbes are present, C3b is very quickly degraded ina hydrolysis reaction using the water in the blood. However, if invading microbes are present, C3b attaches to thesurface of these microbes. Once attached, C3b will recruit other complement proteins in a cascade (Figure 17.9).The classical pathway provides a more efficient mechanism of activating the complement cascade, but it dependsupon the production of antibodies by the specific adaptive immune defenses. To initiate the classical pathway, aspecific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody-antigen complex. This activates the first proteinin the complement cascade, the C1 complex. The C1 complex is a multipart protein complex, and each componentparticipates in the full activation of the overall complex. Following recruitment and activation of the C1 complex, theremaining classical pathway complement proteins are recruited and activated in a cascading sequence (Figure 17.9).The lectin activation pathway is similar to the classical pathway, but it is triggered by the binding of mannose-bindinglectin, an acute-phase protein, to carbohydrates on the microbial surface. Like other acute-phase proteins, lectins areproduced by liver cells and are commonly upregulated in response to inflammatory signals received by the bodyduring an infection (Figure 17.9).Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 747Figure 17.9 The three complement activation pathways have different triggers, as shown here, but all three result inthe activation of the complement protein C3, which produces C3a and C3b. The latter binds to the surface of thetarget cell and then works with other complement proteins to cleave C5 into C5a and C5b. C5b also binds to the cellsurface and then recruits C6 through C9; these molecules form a ring structure called the membrane attack complex(MAC), which punches through the cell membrane of the invading pathogen, causing it to swell and burst.Although each complement activation pathway is initiated in a different way, they all provide the same protectiveoutcomes: opsonization, inflammation, chemotaxis, and cytolysis. The term opsonization refers to the coating of apathogen by a chemical substance (called an opsonin) that allows phagocytic cells to recognize, engulf, and destroyit more easily. Opsonins from the complement cascade include C1q, C3b, and C4b. Additional important opsoninsinclude mannose-binding proteins and antibodies. The complement fragments C3a and C5a are well-characterizedanaphylatoxins with potent proinflammatory functions. Anaphylatoxins activate mast cells, causing degranulationand the release of inflammatory chemical signals, including mediators that cause vasodilation and increased vascularpermeability. C5a is also one of the most potent chemoattractants for neutrophils and other white blood cells, cellulardefenses that will be discussed in the next section.The complement proteins C6, C7, C8, and C9 assemble into a membrane attack complex (MAC), which allowsC9 to polymerize into pores in the membranes of gram-negative bacteria. These pores allow water, ions, and othermolecules to move freely in and out of the targeted cells, eventually leading to cell lysis and death of the pathogen(Figure 17.9). However, the MAC is only effective against gram-negative bacteria; it cannot penetrate the thick layerof peptidoglycan associated with cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. Since the MAC does not pose a lethal threat togram-positive bacterial pathogens, complement-mediated opsonization is more important for their clearance.CytokinesCytokines are soluble proteins that act as communication signals between cells. In a nonspecific innate immuneresponse, various cytokines may be released to stimulate production of chemical mediators or other cell functions,such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, inhibition of cell division, apoptosis, and chemotaxis.When a cytokine binds to its target receptor, the effect can vary widely depending on the type of cytokine and the typeof cell or receptor to which it has bound. The function of a particular cytokine can be described as autocrine, paracrine,or endocrine (Figure 17.10). In autocrine function, the same cell that releases the cytokine is the recipient of thesignal; in other words, autocrine function is a form of self-stimulation by a cell. In contrast, paracrine functioninvolves the release of cytokines from one cell to other nearby cells, stimulating some response from the recipientcells. Last, endocrine function occurs when cells release cytokines into the bloodstream to be carried to target cellsmuch farther away.748 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 17.10 Autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine actions describe which cells are targeted by cytokines and howfar the cytokines must travel to bind to their intended target cells’ receptors.Three important classes of cytokines are the interleukins, chemokines, and interferons. The interleukins wereoriginally thought to be produced only by leukocytes (white blood cells) and to only stimulate leukocytes, thusthe reasons for their name. Although interleukins are involved in modulating almost every function of the immunesystem, their role in the body is not restricted to immunity. Interleukins are also produced by and stimulate a varietyof cells unrelated to immune defenses.The chemokines are chemotactic factors that recruit leukocytes to sites of infection, tissue damage, and inflammation.In contrast to more general chemotactic factors, like complement factor C5a, chemokines are very specific in thesubsets of leukocytes they recruit.Interferons are a diverse group of immune signaling molecules and are especially important in our defense againstviruses. Type I interferons (interferon-α and interferon-β) are produced and released by cells infected with virus.These interferons stimulate nearby cells to stop production of mRNA, destroy RNA already produced, and reduceprotein synthesis. These cellular changes inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus, slowing the spreadof the virus. Type I interferons also stimulate various immune cells involved in viral clearance to more aggressivelyattack virus-infected cells. Type II interferon (interferon-γ) is an important activator of immune cells (Figure 17.11).Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 749Figure 17.11 Interferons are cytokines released by a cell infected with a virus. Interferon-α and interferon-β signaluninfected neighboring cells to inhibit mRNA synthesis, destroy RNA, and reduce protein synthesis (top arrow).Interferon-α and interferon-β also promote apoptosis in cells infected with the virus (middle arrow). Interferon-γ alertsneighboring immune cells to an attack (bottom arrow). Although interferons do not cure the cell releasing them orother infected cells, which will soon die, their release may prevent additional cells from becoming infected, thusstemming the infection.Inflammation-Eliciting MediatorsMany of the chemical mediators discussed in this section contribute in some way to inflammation and fever, whichare nonspecific immune responses discussed in more detail in Inflammation and Fever. Cytokines stimulate theproduction of acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein and mannose-binding lectin in the liver. These acutephaseproteins act as opsonins, activating complement cascades through the lectin pathway.Some cytokines also bind mast cells and basophils, inducing them to release histamine, a proinflammatorycompound. Histamine receptors are found on a variety of cells and mediate proinflammatory events, such asbronchoconstriction (tightening of the airways) and smooth muscle contraction.In addition to histamine, mast cells may release other chemical mediators, such as leukotrienes. Leukotrienesare lipid-based proinflammatory mediators that are produced from the metabolism of arachidonic acid in thecell membrane of leukocytes and tissue cells. Compared with the proinflammatory effects of histamine, those ofleukotrienes are more potent and longer lasting. Together, these chemical mediators can induce coughing, vomiting,and diarrhea, which serve to expel pathogens from the body.Certain cytokines also stimulate the production of prostaglandins, chemical mediators that promote the inflammatoryeffects of kinins and histamines. Prostaglandins can also help to set the body temperature higher, leading to fever,which promotes the activities of white blood cells and slightly inhibits the growth of pathogenic microbes (seeInflammation and Fever).Another inflammatory mediator, bradykinin, contributes to edema, which occurs when fluids and leukocytes leakout of the bloodstream and into tissues. It binds to receptors on cells in the capillary walls, causing the capillaries todilate and become more permeable to fluids.750 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What do the three complement activation pathways have in common?• Explain autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine signals.• Name two important inflammation-eliciting mediators.Part 2To relieve the constriction of her airways, Angela is immediately treated with antihistamines and administeredcorticosteroids through an inhaler, and then monitored for a period of time. Though her condition does notworsen, the drugs do not seem to be alleviating her condition. She is admitted to the hospital for furtherobservation, testing, and treatment.Following admission, a clinician conducts allergy testing to try to determine if something in her environmentmight be triggering an allergic inflammatory response. A doctor orders blood analysis to check for levels ofparticular cytokines. A sputum sample is also taken and sent to the lab for microbial staining, culturing, andidentification of pathogens that could be causing an infection.• Which aspects of the innate immune system could be contributing to Angela’s airway constriction?• Why was Angela treated with antihistamines?• Why would the doctor be interested in levels of cytokines in Angela’s blood?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Table 17.5 provides a summary of the chemical defenses discussed in this section.Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate ImmunityDefense Examples FunctionSebum from sebaceous glands Provides oil barrier protecting hair follicle pores frompathogensOleic acid from sebum and skinmicrobiotaLowers pH to inhibit pathogensLysozyme in secretions Kills bacteria by attacking cell wallAcid in stomach, urine, and vagina Inhibits or kills bacteriaDigestive enzymes and bile Kill bacteriaLactoferrin and transferrin Bind and sequester iron, inhibiting bacterial growthChemicalsand enzymesin body fluidsSurfactant in lungs Kills bacteriaAntimicrobialpeptidesDefensins, bacteriocins,dermicidin, cathelicidin, histatins,Kill bacteria by attacking membranes or interfering withcell functionsTable 17.5Clinical FocusChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 751Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate ImmunityDefense Examples FunctionAcute-phase proteins (C-reactiveprotein, serum amyloid A, ferritin,fibrinogen, transferrin, andmannose-binding lectin)Inhibit the growth of bacteria and assist in the trappingand killing of bacteriaComplements C3b and C4b Opsonization of pathogens to aid phagocytosisComplement C5a Chemoattractant for phagocytesPlasmaproteinmediatorsComplements C3a and C5a Proinflammatory anaphylatoxinsInterleukins Stimulate and modulate most functions of immunesystemChemokines Recruit white blood cells to infected areaCytokinesInterferons Alert cells to viral infection, induce apoptosis of virusinfectedcells, induce antiviral defenses in infected andnearby uninfected cells, stimulate immune cells to attackvirus-infected cellsHistamine Promotes vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, smoothmuscle contraction, increased secretion and mucusproductionLeukotrienes Promote inflammation; stronger and longer lasting thanhistamineProstaglandins Promote inflammation and feverInflammationelicitingmediatorsBradykinin Increases vasodilation and vascular permeability,leading to edemaTable 17.517.3 Cellular DefensesLearning Objectives• Identify and describe the components of blood• Explain the process by which the formed elements of blood are formed (hematopoiesis)• Describe the characteristics of formed elements found in peripheral blood, as well as their respective functionswithin the innate immune systemIn the previous section, we discussed some of the chemical mediators found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood. Thenonfluid portion of blood consists of various types of formed elements, so called because they are all formed from thesame stem cells found in bone marrow. The three major categories of formed elements are: red blood cells (RBCs),also called erythrocytes; platelets, also called thrombocytes; and white blood cells (WBCs), also called leukocytes.Red blood cells are primarily responsible for carrying oxygen to tissues. Platelets are cellular fragments thatparticipate in blood clot formation and tissue repair. Several different types of WBCs participate in variousnonspecific mechanisms of innate and adaptive immunity. In this section, we will focus primarily on the innatemechanisms of various types of WBCs.752 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5HematopoiesisAll of the formed elements of blood are derived from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bonemarrow. As the HSCs make copies of themselves in the bone marrow, individual cells receive different cues fromthe body that control how they develop and mature. As a result, the HSCs differentiate into different types of bloodcells that, once mature, circulate in peripheral blood. This process of differentiation, called hematopoiesis, is shownin more detail in Figure 17.12.In terms of sheer numbers, the vast majority of HSCs become erythrocytes. Much smaller numbers becomeleukocytes and platelets. Leukocytes can be further subdivided into granulocytes, which are characterized bynumerous granules visible in the cytoplasm, and agranulocytes, which lack granules. Figure 17.13 provides anoverview of the various types of formed elements, including their relative numbers, primary function, and lifespans.Figure 17.12 All the formed elements of the blood arise by differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells in the bonemarrow.Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 753Figure 17.13 Formed elements of blood include erythrocytes (red blood cells), leukocytes (white blood cells), andplatelets.754 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5GranulocytesThe various types of granulocytes can be distinguished from one another in a blood smear by the appearance oftheir nuclei and the contents of their granules, which confer different traits, functions, and staining properties. Theneutrophils, also called polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), have a nucleus with three to five lobes and small,numerous, lilac-colored granules. Each lobe of the nucleus is connected by a thin strand of material to the other lobes.The eosinophils have fewer lobes in the nucleus (typically 2–3) and larger granules that stain reddish-orange. Thebasophils have a two-lobed nucleus and large granules that stain dark blue or purple (Figure 17.14).Figure 17.14 Granulocytes can be distinguished by the number of lobes in their nuclei and the staining properties oftheir granules. (credit “neutrophil” micrograph: modification of work by Ed Uthman)Neutrophils (PMNs)Neutrophils (PMNs) are frequently involved in the elimination and destruction of extracellular bacteria. They arecapable of migrating through the walls of blood vessels to areas of bacterial infection and tissue damage, wherethey seek out and kill infectious bacteria. PMN granules contain a variety of defensins and hydrolytic enzymesthat help them destroy bacteria through phagocytosis (described in more detail in Pathogen Recognition andPhagocytosis) In addition, when many neutrophils are brought into an infected area, they can be stimulated torelease toxic molecules into the surrounding tissue to better clear infectious agents. This is called degranulation.Another mechanism used by neutrophils is neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which are extruded meshes ofchromatin that are closely associated with antimicrobial granule proteins and components. Chromatin is DNA withassociated proteins (usually histone proteins, around which DNA wraps for organization and packing within a cell).By creating and releasing a mesh or lattice-like structure of chromatin that is coupled with antimicrobial proteins,the neutrophils can mount a highly concentrated and efficient attack against nearby pathogens. Proteins frequentlyassociated with NETs include lactoferrin, gelatinase, cathepsin G, and myeloperoxidase. Each has a different meansof promoting antimicrobial activity, helping neutrophils eliminate pathogens. The toxic proteins in NETs may killsome of the body’s own cells along with invading pathogens. However, this collateral damage can be repaired afterthe danger of the infection has been eliminated.As neutrophils fight an infection, a visible accumulation of leukocytes, cellular debris, and bacteria at the site ofinfection can be observed. This buildup is what we call pus (also known as purulent or suppurative dischargeor drainage). The presence of pus is a sign that the immune defenses have been activated against an infection;Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 755historically, some physicians believed that inducing pus formation could actually promote the healing of wounds.The practice of promoting “laudable pus” (by, for instance, wrapping a wound in greasy wool soaked in wine) datesback to the ancient physician Galen in the 2nd century AD, and was practiced in variant forms until the 17th century(though it was not universally accepted). Today, this method is no longer practiced because we now know that it isnot effective. Although a small amount of pus formation can indicate a strong immune response, artificially inducingpus formation does not promote recovery.EosinophilsEosinophils are granulocytes that protect against protozoa and helminths; they also play a role in allergic reactions.The granules of eosinophils, which readily absorb the acidic reddish dye eosin, contain histamine, degradativeenzymes, and a compound known as major basic protein (MBP) (Figure 17.14). MBP binds to the surfacecarbohydrates of parasites, and this binding is associated with disruption of the cell membrane and membranepermeability.BasophilsBasophils have cytoplasmic granules of varied size and are named for their granules’ ability to absorb the basicdye methylene blue (Figure 17.14). Their stimulation and degranulation can result from multiple triggering events.Activated complement fragments C3a and C5a, produced in the activation cascades of complement proteins, act asanaphylatoxins by inducing degranulation of basophils and inflammatory responses. This cell type is important inallergic reactions and other responses that involve inflammation. One of the most abundant components of basophilgranules is histamine, which is released along with other chemical factors when the basophil is stimulated. Thesechemicals can be chemotactic and can help to open the gaps between cells in the blood vessels. Other mechanisms forbasophil triggering require the assistance of antibodies, as discussed in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity.Mast CellsHematopoiesis also gives rise to mast cells, which appear to be derived from the same common myeloid progenitorcell as neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Functionally, mast cells are very similar to basophils, containing manyof the same components in their granules (e.g., histamine) and playing a similar role in allergic responses and otherinflammatory reactions. However, unlike basophils, mast cells leave the circulating blood and are most frequentlyfound residing in tissues. They are often associated with blood vessels and nerves or found close to surfaces thatinterface with the external environment, such as the skin and mucous membranes in various regions of the body(Figure 17.15).756 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 17.15 Mast cells function similarly to basophils by inducing and promoting inflammatory responses. (a) Thisfigure shows mast cells in blood. In a blood smear, they are difficult to differentiate from basophils (b). Unlikebasophils, mast cells migrate from the blood into various tissues. (credit right: modification of work by Greenland JR,Xu X, Sayah DM, Liu FC, Jones KD, Looney MR, Caughey GH)• Describe the granules and nuclei of neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells.• Name three antimicrobial mechanisms of neutrophilsPart 3Angela’s tests come back negative for all common allergens, and her sputum samples contain no abnormalpresence of pathogenic microbes or elevated levels of members of the normal respiratory microbiota. Shedoes, however, have elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines in her blood.The swelling of her airway has still not responded to treatment with antihistamines or corticosteroids. Additionalblood work shows that Angela has a mildly elevated white blood cell count but normal antibody levels. Also,she has a lower-than-normal level of the complement protein C4.• What does this new information reveal about the cause of Angela’s constricted airways?• What are some possible conditions that could lead to low levels of complement proteins?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.AgranulocytesAs their name suggests, agranulocytes lack visible granules in the cytoplasm. Agranulocytes can be categorized aslymphocytes or monocytes (Figure 17.13). Among the lymphocytes are natural killer cells, which play an importantrole in nonspecific innate immune defenses. Lymphocytes also include the B cells and T cells, which are discussedin the next chapter because they are central players in the specific adaptive immune defenses. The monocytesdifferentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells, which are collectively referred to as the mononuclear phagocytesystem.Clinical FocusChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 757Natural Killer CellsMost lymphocytes are primarily involved in the specific adaptive immune response, and thus will be discussedin the following chapter. An exception is the natural killer cells (NK cells); these mononuclear lymphocytes usenonspecific mechanisms to recognize and destroy cells that are abnormal in some way. Cancer cells and cells infectedwith viruses are two examples of cellular abnormalities that are targeted by NK cells. Recognition of such cellsinvolves a complex process of identifying inhibitory and activating molecular markers on the surface of the target cell.Molecular markers that make up the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are expressed by healthy cells as anindication of “self.” This will be covered in more detail in next chapter. NK cells are able to recognize normal MHCmarkers on the surface of healthy cells, and these MHC markers serve as an inhibitory signal preventing NK cellactivation. However, cancer cells and virus-infected cells actively diminish or eliminate expression of MHC markerson their surface. When these MHC markers are diminished or absent, the NK cell interprets this as an abnormalityand a cell in distress. This is one part of the NK cell activation process (Figure 17.16). NK cells are also activated bybinding to activating molecular molecules on the target cell. These activating molecular molecules include “alteredself” or “nonself” molecules. When a NK cell recognizes a decrease in inhibitory normal MHC molecules and anincrease in activating molecules on the surface of a cell, the NK cell will be activated to eliminate the cell in distress.Figure 17.16 Natural killer (NK) cells are inhibited by the presence of the major histocompatibility cell (MHC)receptor on healthy cells. Cancer cells and virus-infected cells have reduced expression of MHC and increasedexpression of activating molecules. When a NK cell recognizes decreased MHC and increased activating molecules,it will kill the abnormal cell.Once a cell has been recognized as a target, the NK cell can use several different mechanisms to kill its target.For example, it may express cytotoxic membrane proteins and cytokines that stimulate the target cell to undergoapoptosis, or controlled cell suicide. NK cells may also use perforin-mediated cytotoxicity to induce apoptosis in758 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5target cells. This mechanism relies on two toxins released from granules in the cytoplasm of the NK cell: perforin,a protein that creates pores in the target cell, and granzymes, proteases that enter through the pores into the targetcell’s cytoplasm, where they trigger a cascade of protein activation that leads to apoptosis. The NK cell binds to theabnormal target cell, releases its destructive payload, and detaches from the target cell. While the target cell undergoesapoptosis, the NK cell synthesizes more perforin and proteases to use on its next target.NK cells contain these toxic compounds in granules in their cytoplasm. When stained, the granules are azurophilicand can be visualized under a light microscope (Figure 17.17). Even though they have granules, NK cells arenot considered granulocytes because their granules are far less numerous than those found in true granulocytes.Furthermore, NK cells have a different lineage than granulocytes, arising from lymphoid rather than myeloid stemcells (Figure 17.12).Figure 17.17 Natural killer cell with perforin-containing granules. (credit: modification of work by Rolstad B)MonocytesThe largest of the white blood cells, monocytes have a nucleus that lacks lobes, and they also lack granules in thecytoplasm (Figure 17.18). Nevertheless, they are effective phagocytes, engulfing pathogens and apoptotic cells tohelp fight infection.When monocytes leave the bloodstream and enter a specific body tissue, they differentiate into tissue-specificphagocytes called macrophages and dendritic cells. They are particularly important residents of lymphoid tissue,as well as nonlymphoid sites and organs. Macrophages and dendritic cells can reside in body tissues for significantlengths of time. Macrophages in specific body tissues develop characteristics suited to the particular tissue. Not onlydo they provide immune protection for the tissue in which they reside but they also support normal function of theirneighboring tissue cells through the production of cytokines. Macrophages are given tissue-specific names, and a fewexamples of tissue-specific macrophages are listed in Table 17.6. Dendritic cells are important sentinels residingin the skin and mucous membranes, which are portals of entry for many pathogens. Monocytes, macrophages, anddendritic cells are all highly phagocytic and important promoters of the immune response through their productionand release of cytokines. These cells provide an essential bridge between innate and adaptive immune responses, asdiscussed in the next section as well as the next chapter.Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 759Figure 17.18 Monocytes are large, agranular white blood cells with a nucleus that lacks lobes. When monocytesleave the bloodstream, they differentiate and become macrophages with tissue-specific properties. (credit left:modification of work by Armed Forces Institute of Pathology; credit right: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Macrophages Found in Various Body TissuesTissue MacrophageBrain and central nervous system Microglial cellsLiver Kupffer cellsLungs Alveolar macrophages (dust cells)Peritoneal cavity Peritoneal macrophagesTable 17.6• Describe the signals that activate natural killer cells.• What is the difference between monocytes and macrophages?17.4 Pathogen Recognition and PhagocytosisLearning Objectives• Explain how leukocytes migrate from peripheral blood into infected tissues• Explain the mechanisms by which leukocytes recognize pathogens• Explain the process of phagocytosis and the mechanisms by which phagocytes destroy and degrade pathogensSeveral of the cell types discussed in the previous section can be described as phagocytes—cells whose main functionis to seek, ingest, and kill pathogens. This process, called phagocytosis, was first observed in starfish in the 1880s byNobel Prize-winning zoologist Ilya Metchnikoff (1845–1916), who made the connection to white blood cells (WBCs)760 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5in humans and other animals. At the time, Pasteur and other scientists believed that WBCs were spreading pathogensrather than killing them (which is true for some diseases, such as tuberculosis). But in most cases, phagocytes providea strong, swift, and effective defense against a broad range of microbes, making them a critical component of innatenonspecific immunity. This section will focus on the mechanisms by which phagocytes are able to seek, recognize,and destroy pathogens.Extravasation (Diapedesis) of LeukocytesSome phagocytes are leukocytes (WBCs) that normally circulate in the bloodstream. To reach pathogens locatedin infected tissue, leukocytes must pass through the walls of small capillary blood vessels within tissues. Thisprocess, called extravasation, or diapedesis, is initiated by complement factor C5a, as well as cytokines releasedinto the immediate vicinity by resident macrophages and tissue cells responding to the presence of the infectiousagent (Figure 17.19). Similar to C5a, many of these cytokines are proinflammatory and chemotactic, and theybind to cells of small capillary blood vessels, initiating a response in the endothelial cells lining the inside of theblood vessel walls. This response involves the upregulation and expression of various cellular adhesion moleculesand receptors. Leukocytes passing through will stick slightly to the adhesion molecules, slowing down and rollingalong the blood vessel walls near the infected area. When they reach a cellular junction, they will bind to evenmore of these adhesion molecules, flattening out and squeezing through the cellular junction in a process known astransendothelial migration. This mechanism of “rolling adhesion” allows leukocytes to exit the bloodstream andenter the infected areas, where they can begin phagocytosing the invading pathogens.Note that extravasation does not occur in arteries or veins. These blood vessels are surrounded by thicker, multilayerprotective walls, in contrast to the thin single-cell-layer walls of capillaries. Furthermore, the blood flow in arteries istoo turbulent to allow for rolling adhesion. Also, some leukocytes tend to respond to an infection more quickly thanothers. The first to arrive typically are neutrophils, often within hours of a bacterial infection. By contract, monocytesmay take several days to leave the bloodstream and differentiate into macrophages.Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 761Figure 17.19 Damaged cells and macrophages that have ingested pathogens release cytokines that areproinflammatory and chemotactic for leukocytes. In addition, activation of complement at the site of infection results inproduction of the chemotactic and proinflammatory C5a. Leukocytes exit the blood vessel and follow thechemoattractant signal of cytokines and C5a to the site of infection. Granulocytes such as neutrophils releasechemicals that destroy pathogens. They are also capable of phagocytosis and intracellular killing of bacterialpathogens.762 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Watch the following videos on leukocyte extravasation (https://openstax.org/l/22leukextrvid) and leukocyte rolling (https://openstax.org/l/22leukrollvid)to learn more.• Explain the role of adhesion molecules in the process of extravasation.Pathogen RecognitionAs described in the previous section, opsonization of pathogens by antibody; complement factors C1q, C3b, andC4b; and lectins can assist phagocytic cells in recognition of pathogens and attachment to initiate phagocytosis.However, not all pathogen recognition is opsonin dependent. Phagocytes can also recognize molecular structures thatare common to many groups of pathogenic microbes. Such structures are called pathogen-associated molecularpatterns (PAMPs). Common PAMPs include the following:• peptidoglycan, found in bacterial cell walls;• flagellin, a protein found in bacterial flagella;• lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria;• lipopeptides, molecules expressed by most bacteria; and• nucleic acids such as viral DNA or RNA.Like numerous other PAMPs, these substances are integral to the structure of broad classes of microbes.The structures that allow phagocytic cells to detect PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Onegroup of PRRs is the toll-like receptors (TLRs), which bind to various PAMPs and communicate with the nucleusof the phagocyte to elicit a response. Many TLRs (and other PRRs) are located on the surface of a phagocyte, butsome can also be found embedded in the membranes of interior compartments and organelles (Figure 17.20). Theseinterior PRRs can be useful for the binding and recognition of intracellular pathogens that may have gained accessto the inside of the cell before phagocytosis could take place. Viral nucleic acids, for example, might encounter aninterior PRR, triggering production of the antiviral cytokine interferon.In addition to providing the first step of pathogen recognition, the interaction between PAMPs and PRRs onmacrophages provides an intracellular signal that activates the phagocyte, causing it to transition from a dormantstate of readiness and slow proliferation to a state of hyperactivity, proliferation, production/secretion of cytokines,and enhanced intracellular killing. PRRs on macrophages also respond to chemical distress signals from damagedor stressed cells. This allows macrophages to extend their responses beyond protection from infectious diseases to abroader role in the inflammatory response initiated from injuries or other diseases.Link to LearningChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 763Figure 17.20 Phagocytic cells contain pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) capable of recognizing variouspathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). These PRRs can be found on the plasma membrane or in internalphagosomes. When a PRR recognizes a PAMP, it sends a signal to the nucleus that activates genes involved inphagocytosis, cellular proliferation, production and secretion of antiviral interferons and proinflammatory cytokines,and enhanced intracellular killing.• Name four pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).• Describe the process of phagocyte activation.Pathogen DegradationOnce pathogen recognition and attachment occurs, the pathogen is engulfed in a vesicle and brought into the internalcompartment of the phagocyte in a process called phagocytosis (Figure 17.21). PRRs can aid in phagocytosis byfirst binding to the pathogen’s surface, but phagocytes are also capable of engulfing nearby items even if they are notbound to specific receptors. To engulf the pathogen, the phagocyte forms a pseudopod that wraps around the pathogenand then pinches it off into a membrane vesicle called a phagosome. Acidification of the phagosome (pH decreases tothe range of 4–5) provides an important early antibacterial mechanism. The phagosome containing the pathogen fuseswith one or more lysosomes, forming a phagolysosome. Formation of the phagolysosome enhances the acidification,which is essential for activation of pH-dependent digestive lysosomal enzymes and production of hydrogen peroxideand toxic reactive oxygen species. Lysosomal enzymes such as lysozyme, phospholipase, and proteases digest thepathogen. Other enzymes are involved a respiratory burst. During the respiratory burst, phagocytes will increase theiruptake and consumption of oxygen, but not for energy production. The increased oxygen consumption is focused onthe production of superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and other reactive oxygen species that areantibacterial.In addition to the reactive oxygen species produced by the respiratory burst, reactive nitrogen compounds with764 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5cytotoxic (cell-killing) potential can also form. For example, nitric oxide can react with superoxide to formperoxynitrite, a highly reactive nitrogen compound with degrading capabilities similar to those of the reactive oxygenspecies. Some phagocytes even contain an internal storehouse of microbicidal defensin proteins (e.g., neutrophilgranules). These destructive forces can be released into the area around the cell to degrade microbes externally.Neutrophils, especially, can be quite efficient at this secondary antimicrobial mechanism.Once degradation is complete, leftover waste products are excreted from the cell in an exocytic vesicle. However, it isimportant to note that not all remains of the pathogen are excreted as waste. Macrophages and dendritic cells are alsoantigen-presenting cells involved in the specific adaptive immune response. These cells further process the remainsof the degraded pathogen and present key antigens (specific pathogen proteins) on their cellular surface. This is animportant step for stimulation of some adaptive immune responses, as will be discussed in more detail in the nextchapter.Figure 17.21 The stages of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a pathogen, the formation of a phagosome, thedigestion of the pathogenic particle in the phagolysosome, and the expulsion of undigested materials from the cell.Visit this link (https://openstax.org/l/22phagpathvid) to view a phagocytechasing and engulfing a pathogen.• What is the difference between a phagosome and a lysosome?When Phagocytosis FailsAlthough phagocytosis successfully destroys many pathogens, some are able to survive and even exploitLink to LearningMicro ConnectionsChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 765this defense mechanism to multiply in the body and cause widespread infection. Protozoans of the genusLeishmania are one example. These obligate intracellular parasites are flagellates transmitted to humans bythe bite of a sand fly. Infections cause serious and sometimes disfiguring sores and ulcers in the skin andother tissues (Figure 17.22). Worldwide, an estimated 1.3 million people are newly infected with leishmaniasisannually.[1]Salivary peptides from the sand fly activate host macrophages at the site of their bite. The classic oralternate pathway for complement activation ensues with C3b opsonization of the parasite. Leishmania cellsare phagocytosed, lose their flagella, and multiply in a form known as an amastigote (Leishman-Donovanbody) within the phagolysosome. Although many other pathogens are destroyed in the phagolysosome,survival of the Leishmania amastigotes is maintained by the presence of surface lipophosphoglycan andacid phosphatase. These substances inhibit the macrophage respiratory burst and lysosomal enzymes. Theparasite then multiplies inside the cell and lyses the infected macrophage, releasing the amastigotes to infectother macrophages within the same host. Should another sand fly bite an infected person, it might ingestamastigotes and then transmit them to another individual through another bite.There are several different forms of leishmaniasis. The most common is a localized cutaneous form of theillness caused by L. tropica, which typically resolves spontaneously over time but with some significantlymphocyte infiltration and permanent scarring. A mucocutaneous form of the disease, caused by L. vianniabrasilienfsis, produces lesions in the tissue of the nose and mouth and can be life threatening. A visceral formof the illness can be caused by several of the different Leishmania species. It affects various organ systemsand causes abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen. Irregular fevers, anemia, liver dysfunction, andweight loss are all signs and symptoms of visceral leishmaniasis. If left untreated, it is typically fatal.Figure 17.22 (a) Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a disfiguring disease caused by the intracellular flagellateLeishmania tropica, transmitted by the bite of a sand fly. (b) This light micrograph of a sample taken from askin lesion shows a large cell, which is a macrophage infected with L. tropica amastigotes (arrows). Theamastigotes have lost their flagella but their nuclei are visible. Soon the amastigotes will lyse the macrophageand be engulfed by other phagocytes, spreading the infection. (credit a: modification of work by Otis HistoricalArchives of “National Museum of Health & Medicine”; credit b: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)1. World Health Organization. “Leishmaniasis.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs375/en/.766 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.517.5 Inflammation and FeverLearning Objectives• Identify the signs of inflammation and fever and explain why they occur• Explain the advantages and risks posed by inflammatory responsesThe inflammatory response, or inflammation, is triggered by a cascade of chemical mediators and cellular responsesthat may occur when cells are damaged and stressed or when pathogens successfully breach the physical barriersof the innate immune system. Although inflammation is typically associated with negative consequences of injuryor disease, it is a necessary process insofar as it allows for recruitment of the cellular defenses needed to eliminatepathogens, remove damaged and dead cells, and initiate repair mechanisms. Excessive inflammation, however, canresult in local tissue damage and, in severe cases, may even become deadly.Acute InflammationAn early, if not immediate, response to tissue injury is acute inflammation. Immediately following an injury,vasoconstriction of blood vessels will occur to minimize blood loss. The amount of vasoconstriction is related to theamount of vascular injury, but it is usually brief. Vasoconstriction is followed by vasodilation and increased vascularpermeability, as a direct result of the release of histamine from resident mast cells. Increased blood flow and vascularpermeability can dilute toxins and bacterial products at the site of injury or infection. They also contribute to the fiveobservable signs associated with the inflammatory response: erythema (redness), edema (swelling), heat, pain, andaltered function. Vasodilation and increased vascular permeability are also associated with an influx of phagocytesat the site of injury and/or infection. This can enhance the inflammatory response because phagocytes may releaseproinflammatory chemicals when they are activated by cellular distress signals released from damaged cells, byPAMPs, or by opsonins on the surface of pathogens. Activation of the complement system can further enhance theinflammatory response through the production of the anaphylatoxin C5a. Figure 17.23 illustrates a typical case ofacute inflammation at the site of a skin wound.Figure 17.23 (a) Mast cells detect injury to nearby cells and release histamine, initiating an inflammatory response.(b) Histamine increases blood flow to the wound site, and increased vascular permeability allows fluid, proteins,phagocytes, and other immune cells to enter infected tissue. These events result in the swelling and reddening of theinjured site, and the increased blood flow to the injured site causes it to feel warm. Inflammation is also associatedwith pain due to these events stimulating nerve pain receptors in the tissue. The interaction of phagocyte PRRs withcellular distress signals and PAMPs and opsonins on the surface of pathogens leads to the release of moreproinflammatory chemicals, enhancing the inflammatory response.During the period of inflammation, the release of bradykinin causes capillaries to remain dilated, flooding tissues withChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 767fluids and leading to edema. Increasing numbers of neutrophils are recruited to the area to fight pathogens. As thefight rages on, pus forms from the accumulation of neutrophils, dead cells, tissue fluids, and lymph. Typically, after afew days, macrophages will help to clear out this pus. Eventually, tissue repair can begin in the wounded area.Chronic InflammationWhen acute inflammation is unable to clear an infectious pathogen, chronic inflammation may occur. This oftenresults in an ongoing (and sometimes futile) lower-level battle between the host organism and the pathogen. Thewounded area may heal at a superficial level, but pathogens may still be present in deeper tissues, stimulating ongoinginflammation. Additionally, chronic inflammation may be involved in the progression of degenerative neurologicaldiseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, heart disease, and metastatic cancer.Chronic inflammation may lead to the formation of granulomas, pockets of infected tissue walled off and surroundedby WBCs. Macrophages and other phagocytes wage an unsuccessful battle to eliminate the pathogens and deadcellular materials within a granuloma. One example of a disease that produces chronic inflammation is tuberculosis,which results in the formation of granulomas in lung tissues. A tubercular granuloma is called a tubercle (Figure17.24). Tuberculosis will be covered in more detail in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.Chronic inflammation is not just associated with bacterial infections. Chronic inflammation can be an important causeof tissue damage from viral infections. The extensive scarring observed with hepatitis C infections and liver cirrhosisis the result of chronic inflammation.Figure 17.24 A tubercle is a granuloma in the lung tissue of a patient with tuberculosis. In this micrograph, whiteblood cells (stained purple) have walled off a pocket of tissue infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Granulomasalso occur in many other forms of disease. (credit: modification of work by Piotrowski WJ, Górski P, Duda-SzymańskaJ, Kwiatkowska S)• Name the five signs of inflammation.• Is a granuloma an acute or chronic form of inflammation? Explain.Chronic EdemaIn addition to granulomas, chronic inflammation can also result in long-term edema. A condition knownas lymphatic filariasis (also known as elephantiasis) provides an extreme example. Lymphatic filariasis iscaused by microscopic nematodes (parasitic worms) whose larvae are transmitted between human hostsMicro Connections768 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5by mosquitoes. Adult worms live in the lymphatic vessels, where their presence stimulates infiltration bylymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and thrombocytes (a condition known as lymphangitis). Because of thechronic nature of the illness, granulomas, fibrosis, and blocking of the lymphatic system may eventually occur.Over time, these blockages may worsen with repeated infections over decades, leading to skin thickenedwith edema and fibrosis. Lymph (extracellular tissue fluid) may spill out of the lymphatic areas and back intotissues, causing extreme swelling (Figure 17.25). Secondary bacterial infections commonly follow. Because itis a disease caused by a parasite, eosinophilia (a dramatic rise in the number of eosinophils in the blood) ischaracteristic of acute infection. However, this increase in antiparasite granulocytes is not sufficient to clear theinfection in many cases.Lymphatic filariasis affects an estimated 120 million people worldwide, mostly concentrated in Africa andAsia.[2] Improved sanitation and mosquito control can reduce transmission rates.Figure 17.25 Elephantiasis (chronic edema) of the legs due to filariasis. (credit: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)FeverA fever is an inflammatory response that extends beyond the site of infection and affects the entire body, resultingin an overall increase in body temperature. Body temperature is normally regulated and maintained by thehypothalamus, an anatomical section of the brain that functions to maintain homeostasis in the body. However,certain bacterial or viral infections can result in the production of pyrogens, chemicals that effectively alter the“thermostat setting” of the hypothalamus to elevate body temperature and cause fever. Pyrogens may be exogenousor endogenous. For example, the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), produced by gram-negative bacteria, is anexogenous pyrogen that may induce the leukocytes to release endogenous pyrogens such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6,interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). In a cascading effect, these molecules can then lead to therelease of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from other cells, resetting the hypothalamus to initiate fever (Figure 17.26).2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Lymphatic Filiariasis.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/lymphaticfilariasis/gen_info/faqs.html.Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 769Figure 17.26 The role of the hypothalamus in the inflammatory response. Macrophages recognize pathogens in anarea and release cytokines that trigger inflammation. The cytokines also send a signal up the vagus nerve to thehypothalamus.Like other forms of inflammation, a fever enhances the innate immune defenses by stimulating leukocytes to killpathogens. The rise in body temperature also may inhibit the growth of many pathogens since human pathogens aremesophiles with optimum growth occurring around 35 °C (95 °F). In addition, some studies suggest that fever mayalso stimulate release of iron-sequestering compounds from the liver, thereby starving out microbes that rely on ironfor growth.[3]During fever, the skin may appear pale due to vasoconstriction of the blood vessels in the skin, which is mediatedby the hypothalamus to divert blood flow away from extremities, minimizing the loss of heat and raising the coretemperature. The hypothalamus will also stimulate shivering of muscles, another effective mechanism of generatingheat and raising the core temperature.The crisis phase occurs when the fever breaks. The hypothalamus stimulates vasodilation, resulting in a return ofblood flow to the skin and a subsequent release of heat from the body. The hypothalamus also stimulates sweating,which cools the skin as the sweat evaporates.Although a low-level fever may help an individual overcome an illness, in some instances, this immune responsecan be too strong, causing tissue and organ damage and, in severe cases, even death. The inflammatory response tobacterial superantigens is one scenario in which a life-threatening fever may develop. Superantigens are bacterial orviral proteins that can cause an excessive activation of T cells from the specific adaptive immune defense, as well asan excessive release of cytokines that overstimulates the inflammatory response. For example, Staphylococcus aureusand Streptococcus pyogenes are capable of producing superantigens that cause toxic shock syndrome and scarletfever, respectively. Both of these conditions can be associated with very high, life-threatening fevers in excess of 42°C (108 °F).• Explain the difference between exogenous and endogenous pyrogens.• How does a fever inhibit pathogens?3. N. Parrow et al. “Sequestration and Scavenging of Iron in Infection.” Infection and Immunity 81 no. 10 (2013):3503–3514770 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ResolutionGiven her father’s premature death, Angela’s doctor suspects that she has hereditary angioedema, a geneticdisorder that compromises the function of C1 inhibitor protein. Patients with this genetic abnormality may haveoccasional episodes of swelling in various parts of the body. In Angela’s case, the swelling has occurred in therespiratory tract, leading to difficulty breathing. Swelling may also occur in the gastrointestinal tract, causingabdominal cramping, diarrhea, and vomiting, or in the muscles of the face or limbs. This swelling may benonresponsive to steroid treatment and is often misdiagnosed as an allergy.Because there are three types of hereditary angioedema, the doctor orders a more specific blood test to lookfor levels of C1-INH, as well as a functional assay of Angela’s C1 inhibitors. The results suggest that Angelahas type I hereditary angioedema, which accounts for 80%–85% of all cases. This form of the disorder iscaused by a deficiency in C1 esterase inhibitors, the proteins that normally help suppress activation of thecomplement system. When these proteins are deficient or nonfunctional, overstimulation of the system canlead to production of inflammatory anaphylatoxins, which results in swelling and fluid buildup in tissues.There is no cure for hereditary angioedema, but timely treatment with purified and concentrated C1-INH fromblood donors can be effective, preventing tragic outcomes like the one suffered by Angela’s father. A numberof therapeutic drugs, either currently approved or in late-stage human trials, may also be considered as optionsfor treatment in the near future. These drugs work by inhibiting inflammatory molecules or the receptors forinflammatory molecules.Thankfully, Angela’s condition was quickly diagnosed and treated. Although she may experience additionalepisodes in the future, her prognosis is good and she can expect to live a relatively normal life provided sheseeks treatment at the onset of symptoms.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary17.1 Physical Defenses• Nonspecific innate immunity provides a first line of defense against infection by nonspecifically blockingentry of microbes and targeting them for destruction or removal from the body.• The physical defenses of innate immunity include physical barriers, mechanical actions that remove microbesand debris, and the microbiome, which competes with and inhibits the growth of pathogens.• The skin, mucous membranes, and endothelia throughout the body serve as physical barriers that preventmicrobes from reaching potential sites of infection. Tight cell junctions in these tissues prevent microbes frompassing through.• Microbes trapped in dead skin cells or mucus are removed from the body by mechanical actions suchas shedding of skin cells, mucociliary sweeping, coughing, peristalsis, and flushing of bodily fluids (e.g.,urination, tears)• The resident microbiota provide a physical defense by occupying available cellular binding sites andcompeting with pathogens for available nutrients.17.2 Chemical Defenses• Numerous chemical mediators produced endogenously and exogenously exhibit nonspecific antimicrobialfunctions.• Many chemical mediators are found in body fluids such as sebum, saliva, mucus, gastric and intestinal fluids,urine, tears, cerumen, and vaginal secretions.• Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) found on the skin and in other areas of the body are largely producedin response to the presence of pathogens. These include dermcidin, cathelicidin, defensins, histatins, andClinical FocusChapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses 771bacteriocins.• Plasma contains various proteins that serve as chemical mediators, including acute-phase proteins,complement proteins, and cytokines.• The complement system involves numerous precursor proteins that circulate in plasma. These proteinsbecome activated in a cascading sequence in the presence of microbes, resulting in the opsonization ofpathogens, chemoattraction of leukocytes, induction of inflammation, and cytolysis through the formation ofa membrane attack complex (MAC).• Cytokines are proteins that facilitate various nonspecific responses by innate immune cells, includingproduction of other chemical mediators, cell proliferation, cell death, and differentiation.• Cytokines play a key role in the inflammatory response, triggering production of inflammation-elicitingmediators such as acute-phase proteins, histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and bradykinin.17.3 Cellular Defenses• The formed elements of the blood include red blood cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells (leukocytes), andplatelets (thrombocytes). Of these, leukocytes are primarily involved in the immune response.• All formed elements originate in the bone marrow as stem cells (HSCs) that differentiate throughhematopoiesis.• Granulocytes are leukocytes characterized by a lobed nucleus and granules in the cytoplasm. These includeneutrophils (PMNs), eosinophils, and basophils.• Neutrophils are the leukocytes found in the largest numbers in the bloodstream and they primarily fightbacterial infections.• Eosinophils target parasitic infections. Eosinophils and basophils are involved in allergic reactions. Bothrelease histamine and other proinflammatory compounds from their granules upon stimulation.• Mast cells function similarly to basophils but can be found in tissues outside the bloodstream.• Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that recognize and kill abnormal or infected cells by releasingproteins that trigger apoptosis.• Monocytes are large, mononuclear leukocytes that circulate in the bloodstream. They may leave thebloodstream and take up residence in body tissues, where they differentiate and become tissue-specificmacrophages and dendritic cells.17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis• Phagocytes are cells that recognize pathogens and destroy them through phagocytosis.• Recognition often takes place by the use of phagocyte receptors that bind molecules commonly found onpathogens, known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).• The receptors that bind PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors, or PRRs. Toll-like receptors(TLRs) are one type of PRR found on phagocytes.• Extravasation of white blood cells from the bloodstream into infected tissue occurs through the process oftransendothelial migration.• Phagocytes degrade pathogens through phagocytosis, which involves engulfing the pathogen, killing anddigesting it within a phagolysosome, and then excreting undigested matter.17.5 Inflammation and Fever• Inflammation results from the collective response of chemical mediators and cellular defenses to an injury orinfection.• Acute inflammation is short lived and localized to the site of injury or infection. Chronic inflammationoccurs when the inflammatory response is unsuccessful, and may result in the formation of granulomas (e.g.,with tuberculosis) and scarring (e.g., with hepatitis C viral infections and liver cirrhosis).• The five cardinal signs of inflammation are erythema, edema, heat, pain, and altered function. These largelyresult from innate responses that draw increased blood flow to the injured or infected tissue.772 Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host DefensesThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Fever is a system-wide sign of inflammation that raises the body temperature and stimulates the immuneresponse.• Both inflammation and fever can be harmful if the inflammatory response is too severe.