Chapter 23Urogenital System InfectionsFigure 23.1 Many pathogens that cause infections of the urogenital system can be detected in urine samples (left).The top sample in the culture (right) was prepared from the urine of a patient with a urinary tract infection. (credit b:modification of work by Nathan Reading)Chapter Outline23.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital Tract23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System23.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System23.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive System23.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital SystemIntroductionThe urogenital system is a combination of the urinary tract and reproductive system. Because both systems are opento the external environment, they are prone to infections. Some infections are introduced from outside, whereas othersresult from imbalances in the microbiota of the urogenital tract.Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one the most common bacterial infections worldwide, affecting over 100 millionpeople each year. During 2007 in the United States, doctor office visits for UTIs exceeded 10 million, and anadditional 2–3 million emergency department visits were attributed to UTIs. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)also primarily affect the urogenital system and are an important cause of patient morbidity. The Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there are approximately 20 million new cases of reportable STIsannually in the United States, half of which occur in people aged 15–24 years old. When STIs spread to thereproductive organs, they can be associated with severe morbidity and loss of fertility.Because males and females have different urogenital anatomy, urogenital infections may affect males and femalesdifferently. In this chapter, we will discuss the various microbes that cause urogenital disease and the factors thatcontribute to their pathogenicity.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 101123.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the UrogenitalTractLearning Objectives• Compare the anatomy, function, and normal microbiota associated with the male and female urogenital systems• Explain how microorganisms, in general, overcome the defenses of the urogenital system to cause infection• Name, describe, and differentiate between general signs and symptoms associated with infections of theurogenital tractThe urinary system filters blood, excretes wastes, and maintains an appropriate electrolyte and water balance. Thereproductive system is responsible for the production of gametes and participates in conception and, in females,development of offspring. Due to their proximity and overlap, these systems are often studied together and referredto as the urogenital system (or genitourinary system).Anatomy of the Urinary TractThe basic structures of the urinary tract are common in males and females. However, there are unique locations forthese structures in females and males, and there is a significant amount of overlap between the urinary and genitalstructures in males. Figure 23.2 illustrates the urinary anatomy common to females and males.The kidneys carry out the urinary system’s primary functions of filtering the blood and maintaining water andelectrolyte balance. The kidneys are composed of millions of filtration units called nephrons. Each nephron is inintimate contact with blood through a specialized capillary bed called the glomerulus (plural glomeruli). Fluids,electrolytes, and molecules from the blood pass from the glomerulus into the nephron, creating the filtrate thatbecomes urine (Figure 23.3). Urine that collects in each kidney empties through a ureter and drains to the urinarybladder, which stores urine. Urine is released from the bladder to the urethra, which transports it to be excreted fromthe body through the urinary meatus, the opening of the urethra.Part 1Nadia is a newly married 26-year-old graduate student in economics. Recently she has been experiencing anunusual vaginal discharge, as well as some itching and discomfort. Since she is due for her annual physicalexam, she makes an appointment with her doctor hoping that her symptoms can be quickly treated. However,she worries that she may have some sort of sexually transmitted infection (STI). Although she is now in amonogamous relationship, she is not fully certain of her spouse’s sexual history and she is reluctant to ask himabout it.At her checkup, Nadia describes her symptoms to her primary care physician and, somewhat awkwardly,explains why she thinks she might have an STI. Nadia’s doctor reassures her that she regularly sees patientswith similar concerns and encourages her to be fully transparent about her symptoms because some STIscan have serious complications if left untreated. After some further questioning, the doctor takes samples ofNadia’s blood, urine, and vaginal discharge to be sent to the lab for testing.• What are some possible causes of Nadia’s symptoms?• Why does the doctor take so many different samples?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1012 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.2 These structures of the human urinary system are present in both males and females.Figure 23.3 The kidney contains several lobes, each of which contains millions of nephrons. The nephron is thefunctional unit of the kidney, filtering the blood and removing water and dissolved compounds. The filtrate first entersthe glomerulus and then enters the proximal convoluted tubule. As it passes through the tubule, the filtrate is furthermodified by osmosis and active transport until it reaches the larger ducts as urine.Anatomy of the Reproductive SystemThe male reproductive system (Figure 23.4) is located in close proximity to the urinary system, and the urethra ispart of both systems. The testes are responsible for the production of sperm. The epididymis is a coiled tube thatcollects sperm from the testes and passes it on to the vas deferens. The epididymis is also the site of sperm maturationafter they leave the testes. The seminal vesicles and prostate are accessory glands that produce fluid that supportssperm. During ejaculation, the vas deferens releases this mixture of fluid and sperm, called semen, into the urethra,which extends to the end of the penis.The female reproductive system is located near the urinary system (Figure 23.4). The external genitalia (vulva)in females open to the vagina, a muscular passageway that connects to the cervix. The cervix is the lower part ofChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1013the uterus (the organ where a fertilized egg will implant and develop). The cervix is a common site of infection,especially for viruses that may lead to cervical cancer. The uterus leads to the fallopian tubes and eventually to theovaries. Ovaries are the site of ova (egg) production, as well as the site of estrogen and progesterone productionthat are involved in maturation and maintenance of reproductive organs, preparation of the uterus for pregnancy, andregulation of the menstrual cycle.Figure 23.4 The female reproductive system is located in close proximity to the urinary system. In males, theurethra is shared by the reproductive and urinary systems.• What are the major structures of the urinary system, starting where urine is formed?• What structure in males is shared by the reproductive and the urinary systems?Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital SystemThe normal microbiota of different body sites provides an important nonspecific defense against infectious diseases(see Physical Defenses), and the urogenital tract is no exception. In both men and women, however, the kidneysare sterile. Although urine does contain some antibacterial components, bacteria will grow in urine left out at roomtemperature. Therefore, it is primarily the flushing action that keeps the ureters and bladder free of microbes.Below the bladder, the normal microbiota of the male urogenital system is found primarily within the distal urethraand includes bacterial species that are commonly associated with the skin microbiota. In women, the normalmicrobiota is found within the distal one third of the urethra and the vagina. The normal microbiota of the vaginabecomes established shortly after birth and is a complex and dynamic population of bacteria that fluctuates inresponse to environmental changes. Members of the vaginal microbiota play an important role in the nonspecificdefense against vaginal infections and sexually transmitted infections by occupying cellular binding sites andcompeting for nutrients. In addition, the production of lactic acid by members of the microbiota provides an acidicenvironment within the vagina that also serves as a defense against infections. For the majority of women, thelactic-acid–producing bacteria in the vagina are dominated by a variety of species of Lactobacillus. For womenwho lack sufficient lactobacilli in their vagina, lactic acid production comes primarily from other species of bacteriasuch as Leptotrichia spp., Megasphaera spp., and Atopobium vaginae. Lactobacillus spp. use glycogen from vaginalepithelial cells for metabolism and production of lactic acid. This process is tightly regulated by the hormoneestrogen. Increased levels of estrogen correlate with increased levels of vaginal glycogen, increased production oflactic acid, and a lower vaginal pH. Therefore, decreases in estrogen during the menstrual cycle and with menopause1014 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5are associated with decreased levels of vaginal glycogen and lactic acid, and a higher pH. In addition to producinglactic acid, Lactobacillus spp. also contribute to the defenses against infectious disease through their production ofhydrogen peroxide and bacteriocins (antibacterial peptides).• What factors affect the microbiota of the female reproductive tract?General Signs and Symptoms of Urogenital InfectionsInfections of the urinary tract most commonly cause inflammation of the bladder (cystitis) or of the urethra(urethritis). Urethritis can be associated with cystitis, but can also be caused by sexually transmitted infections.Symptoms of urethritis in men include burning sensation while urinating, discharge from the penis, and blood in thesemen or the urine. In women, urethritis is associated with painful and frequent urination, vaginal discharge, fever,chills, and abdominal pain. The symptoms of cystitis are similar to those of urethritis. When urethritis is caused bya sexually transmitted pathogen, additional symptoms involving the genitalia can occur. These can include painfulvesicles (blisters), warts, and ulcers. Ureteritis, a rare infection of the ureter, can also occur with cystitis. Theseinfections can be acute or chronic.Pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis are infections of the kidney that are potentially serious. Pyelonephritis is aninfection of one or both of the kidneys and may develop from a lower urinary tract infection; the upper urinary tract,including the ureters, is often affected. Signs and symptoms of pyelonephritis include fever, chills, nausea, vomiting,lower back pain, and frequent painful urination. Pyelonephritis usually only becomes chronic in individuals who havemalformations in or damage to the kidneys.Glomerulonephritis is an inflammation of the glomeruli of the nephrons. Symptoms include excessive proteinand blood in urine, increased blood pressure, and fluid retention leading to edema of face, hands, and feet.Glomerulonephritis may be an acute infection or it can become chronic.Infections occurring within the reproductive structures of males include epididymitis, orchitis, and prostatitis.Bacterial infections may cause inflammation of the epididymis, called epididymitis. This inflammation causes pain inthe scrotum, testicles, and groin; swelling, redness, and warm skin in these areas may also be observed. Inflammationof the testicle, called orchitis, is usually caused by a bacterial infection spreading from the epididymis, but it canalso be a complication of mumps, a viral disease. The symptoms are similar to those of epididymitis, and it is notuncommon for them both to occur together, in which case the condition is called epididymo-orchitis. Inflammationof the prostate gland, called prostatitis, can result from a bacterial infection. The signs and symptoms of prostatitisinclude fever, chills, and pain in the bladder, testicles, and penis. Patients may also experience burning duringurination, difficulty emptying the bladder, and painful ejaculation.Because of its proximity to the exterior, the vagina is a common site for infections in women. The general term for anyinflammation of the vagina is vaginitis. Vaginitis often develops as a result of an overgrowth of bacteria or fungi thatnormally reside in the vaginal microbiota, although it can also result from infections by transient pathogens. Bacterialinfections of the vagina are called bacterial vaginosis, whereas fungal infections (typically involving Candida spp.)are called yeast infections. Dynamic changes affecting the normal microbiota, acid production, and pH variations canbe involved in the initiation of the microbial overgrowth and the development of vaginitis. Although some individualsmay have no symptoms, vaginosis and vaginitis can be associated with discharge, odor, itching, and burning.Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the female reproductive organs including the uterus, cervix,fallopian tubes, and ovaries. The two most common pathogens are the sexually transmitted bacterial pathogensNeisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis. Inflammation of the fallopian tubes, called salpingitis, is themost serious form of PID. Symptoms of PID can vary between women and include pain in the lower abdomen, vaginaldischarge, fever, chills, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and painful urination.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1015• What conditions can result from infections affecting the urinary system?• What are some common causes of vaginitis in women?General Causes and Modes of Transmission of Urogenital InfectionsHormonal changes, particularly shifts in estrogen in women due to pregnancy or menopause, can increasesusceptibility to urogenital infections. As discussed earlier, estrogen plays an important role in regulating theavailability of glycogen and subsequent production of lactic acid by Lactobacillus species. Low levels of estrogen areassociated with an increased vaginal pH and an increased risk of bacterial vaginosis and yeast infections. Estrogenalso plays a role in maintaining the elasticity, strength, and thickness of the vaginal wall, and keeps the vaginal walllubricated, reducing dryness. Low levels of estrogen are associated with thinning of the vaginal wall. This thinningincreases the risk of tears and abrasions, which compromise the protective barrier and increase susceptibility topathogens.Another common cause of urogenital infections in females is fecal contamination that occurs because of the closeproximity of the anus and the urethra. Escherichia coli, an important member of the digestive tract microbiota, is themost common cause of urinary tract infections (urethritis and cystitis) in women; it generally causes infection when itis introduced to the urethra in fecal matter. Good hygiene can reduce the risk of urinary tract infections by this route.In men, urinary tract infections are more commonly associated with other conditions, such as an enlarged prostate,kidney stones, or placement of a urinary catheter. All of these conditions impair the normal emptying of the bladder,which serves to flush out microbes capable of causing infection.Infections that are transmitted between individuals through sexual contact are called sexually transmitted infections(STIs) or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). (The CDC prefers the term STD, but WHO prefers STI,[1] whichencompasses infections that result in disease as well as those that are subclinical or asymptomatic.) STIs often affectthe external genitalia and skin, where microbes are easily transferred through physical contact. Lymph nodes inthe genital region may also become swollen as a result of infection. However, many STIs have systemic effectsas well, causing symptoms that range from mild (e.g., general malaise) to severe (e.g., liver damage or seriousimmunosuppression).• What role does Lactobacillus play in the health of the female reproductive system?• Why do urinary tract infections have different causes in males and females?23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that can cause urinary tract infections• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the urinary tractUrinary tract infections (UTIs) include infections of the urethra, bladder, and kidneys, and are common causes of1. World Health Organization. “Guidelines for the Management of Sexually Transmitted Infections.” World Health Organization, 2003.http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/sti/en/STIGuidelines2003.pdf.1016 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5urethritis, cystitis, pyelonephritis, and glomerulonephritis. Bacteria are the most common causes of UTIs, especiallyin the urethra and bladder.CystitisCystitis is most often caused by a bacterial infection of the bladder, but it can also occur as a reaction to certaintreatments or irritants such as radiation treatment, hygiene sprays, or spermicides. Common symptoms of cystitisinclude dysuria (urination accompanied by burning, discomfort, or pain), pyuria (pus in the urine), hematuria(blood in the urine), and bladder pain.In women, bladder infections are more common because the urethra is short and located in close proximity to theanus, which can result in infections of the urinary tract by fecal bacteria. Bladder infections are also more common inthe elderly because the bladder may not empty fully, causing urine to pool; the elderly may also have weaker immunesystems that make them more vulnerable to infection. Conditions such as prostatitis in men or kidney stones in bothmen and women can impact proper drainage of urine and increase risk of bladder infections. Catheterization can alsoincrease the risk of bladder infection (see Case in Point: Cystitis in the Elderly).Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli (most commonly), Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,and Klebsiella pneumoniae cause most bladder infections. Gram-positive pathogens associated with cystitis includethe coagulase-negative Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Enterococcus faecalis, and Streptococcus agalactiae. Routinemanual urinalysis using a urine dipstick or test strip can be used for rapid screening of infection. These test strips(Figure 23.5) are either held in a urine stream or dipped in a sample of urine to test for the presence of nitrites,leukocyte esterase, protein, or blood that can indicate an active bacterial infection. The presence of nitrite mayindicate the presence of E. coli or K. pneumonia; these bacteria produce nitrate reductase, which converts nitrate tonitrite. The leukocyte esterase (LE) test detects the presence of neutrophils as an indication of active infection.Low specificity, sensitivity, or both, associated with these rapid screening tests require that care be taken ininterpretation of results and in their use in diagnosis of urinary tract infections. Therefore, positive LE or nitrite resultsare followed by a urine culture to confirm a bladder infection. Urine culture is generally accomplished using bloodagar and MacConkey agar, and it is important to culture a clean catch of urine to minimize contamination with normalmicrobiota of the penis and vagina. A clean catch of urine is accomplished by first washing the labia and urethralopening of female patients or the penis of male patients. The patient then releases a small amount of urine into thetoilet bowl before stopping the flow of urine. Finally, the patient resumes urination, this time filling the container usedto collect the specimen.Bacterial cystitis is commonly treated with fluoroquinolones, nitrofurantoin, cephalosporins, or a combination oftrimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. Pain medications may provide relief for patients with dysuria. Treatment is moredifficult in elderly patients, who experience a higher rate of complications such as sepsis and kidney infections.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1017Figure 23.5 A urine dipstick is compared against a color key to determine levels of various chemicals, proteins, orcells in the urine. Abnormal levels may indicate an infection. (credit: modification of work by Suzanne Wakim)Cystitis in the ElderlyRobert, an 81-year-old widower with early onset Alzheimer’s, was recently moved to a nursing home becausehe was having difficulty living on his own. Within a few weeks of his arrival, he developed a fever and beganto experience pain associated with urination. He also began having episodes of confusion and delirium. Thedoctor assigned to examine Robert read his file and noticed that Robert was treated for prostatitis several yearsearlier. When he asked Robert how often he had been urinating, Robert explained that he had been trying notto drink too much so that he didn’t have to walk to the restroom.All of this evidence suggests that Robert likely has a urinary tract infection. Robert’s age means that hisimmune system has probably begun to weaken, and his previous prostate condition may be making it difficultfor him to empty his bladder. In addition, Robert’s avoidance of fluids has led to dehydration and infrequenturination, which may have allowed an infection to establish itself in his urinary tract. The fever and dysuria arecommon signs of a UTI in patients of all ages, and UTIs in elderly patients are often accompanied by a notabledecline in mental function.Physical challenges often discourage elderly individuals from urinating as frequently as they would otherwise.In addition, neurological conditions that disproportionately affect the elderly (e.g., Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sdisease) may also reduce their ability to empty their bladders. Robert’s doctor noted that he was havingdifficulty navigating his new home and recommended that he be given more assistance and that his fluid intakebe monitored. The doctor also took a urine sample and ordered a laboratory culture to confirm the identity ofthe causative agent.• Why is it important to identify the causative agent in a UTI?• Should the doctor prescribe a broad-spectrum or narrow-spectrum antibiotic to treat Robert’s UTI?Why?Case in Point1018 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Kidney Infections (Pyelonephritis and Glomerulonephritis)Pyelonephritis, an inflammation of the kidney, can be caused by bacteria that have spread from other parts of theurinary tract (such as the bladder). In addition, pyelonephritis can develop from bacteria that travel through thebloodstream to the kidney. When the infection spreads from the lower urinary tract, the causative agents are typicallyfecal bacteria such as E. coli. Common signs and symptoms include back pain (due to the location of the kidneys),fever, and nausea or vomiting. Gross hematuria (visible blood in the urine) occurs in 30–40% of women but is rarein men.[2] The infection can become serious, potentially leading to bacteremia and systemic effects that can becomelife-threatening. Scarring of the kidney can occur and persist after the infection has cleared, which may lead todysfunction.Diagnosis of pyelonephritis is made using microscopic examination of urine, culture of urine, testing for leukocyteesterase and nitrite levels, and examination of the urine for blood or protein. It is also important to use blood culturesto evaluate the spread of the pathogen into the bloodstream. Imaging of the kidneys may be performed in highriskpatients with diabetes or immunosuppression, the elderly, patients with previous renal damage, or to rule outan obstruction in the kidney. Pyelonephritis can be treated with either oral or intravenous antibiotics, includingpenicillins, cephalosporins, vancomycin, fluoroquinolones, carbapenems, and aminoglycosides.Glomerulonephritis occurs when the glomeruli of the nephrons are damaged from inflammation. Whereaspyelonephritis is usually acute, glomerulonephritis may be acute or chronic. The most well-characterized mechanismof glomerulonephritis is the post-streptococcal sequelae associated with Streptococcus pyogenes throat and skininfections. Although S. pyogenes does not directly infect the glomeruli of the kidney, immune complexes thatform in blood between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies lodge in the capillary endothelial cell junctions ofthe glomeruli and trigger a damaging inflammatory response. Glomerulonephritis can also occur in patients withbacterial endocarditis (infection and inflammation of heart tissue); however, it is currently unknown whetherglomerulonephritis associated with endocarditis is also immune-mediated.LeptospirosisLeptospira are generally harmless spirochetes that are commonly found in the soil. However, some pathogenic speciescan cause an infection called leptospirosis in the kidneys and other organs (Figure 23.6). Leptospirosis can producefever, headache, chills, vomiting, diarrhea, and rash with severe muscular pain. If the disease continues to progress,infection of the kidney, meninges, or liver may occur and may lead to organ failure or meningitis. When the kidneyand liver become seriously infected, it is called Weil’s disease. Pulmonary hemorrhagic syndrome can also developin the lungs, and jaundice may occur.Leptospira spp. are found widely in animals such as dogs, horses, cattle, pigs, and rodents, and are excreted intheir urine. Humans generally become infected by coming in contact with contaminated soil or water, often whileswimming or during flooding; infection can also occur through contact with body fluids containing the bacteria.The bacteria may enter the body through mucous membranes, skin injuries, or by ingestion. The mechanism ofpathogenicity is not well understood.Leptospirosis is extremely rare in the United States, although it is endemic in Hawaii; 50% of all cases in theUnited States come from Hawaii.[3] It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates, and individualswho work with animals or animal products are most at risk. The bacteria can also be cultivated in specializedmedia, with growth observed in broth in a few days to four weeks; however, diagnosis of leptospirosis is generallymade using faster methods, such as detection of antibodies to Leptospira spp. in patient samples using serologictesting. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), slide agglutination, andindirect immunofluorescence tests may all be used for diagnosis. Treatment for leptospirosis involves broad-spectrumantibiotics such as penicillin and doxycycline. For more serious cases of leptospirosis, antibiotics may be givenintravenously.2. Tibor Fulop. “Acute Pyelonephritis” Medscape, 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/245559-overview.3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Leptospirosis.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/leptospirosis/health_care_workers.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1019Figure 23.6 (a) Dark field view of Leptospira sp. (b) A scanning electron micrograph of Leptospira interrogans, apathogenic species, shows the distinctive spirochete morphology of this genus. (credit b: modification of work byJanice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the most common cause of a kidney infection?• What are the most common symptoms of a kidney infection?Nongonococcal Urethritis (NGU)There are two main categories of bacterial urethritis: gonorrheal and nongonococcal. Gonorrheal urethritis is causedby Neisseria gonorrhoeae and is associated with gonorrhea, a common STI. This cause of urethritis will be discussedin Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System. The term nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) refers toinflammation of the urethra that is unrelated to N. gonorrhoeae. In women, NGU is often asymptomatic. In men,NGU is typically a mild disease, but can lead to purulent discharge and dysuria. Because the symptoms are oftenmild or nonexistent, most infected individuals do not know that they are infected, yet they are carriers of the disease.Asymptomatic patients also have no reason to seek treatment, and although not common, untreated NGU can spreadto the reproductive organs, causing pelvic inflammatory disease and salpingitis in women and epididymitis andprostatitis in men. Important bacterial pathogens that cause nongonococcal urethritis include Chlamydia trachomatis,Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and Mycoplasma hominis.C. trachomatis is a difficult-to-stain, gram-negative bacterium with an ovoid shape. An intracellular pathogen, C.trachomatis causes the most frequently reported STI in the United States, chlamydia. Although most persons infectedwith C. trachomatis are asymptomatic, some patients can present with NGU. C. trachomatis can also cause nonurogenitalinfections such as the ocular disease trachoma (see Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes). Thelife cycle of C. trachomatis is illustrated in Figure 4.5.C. trachomatis has multiple possible virulence factors that are currently being studied to evaluate their roles in causingdisease. These include polymorphic outer-membrane autotransporter proteins, stress response proteins, and type IIIsecretion effectors. The type III secretion effectors have been identified in gram-negative pathogens, including C.trachomatis. This virulence factor is an assembly of more than 20 proteins that form what is called an injectisome forthe transfer of other effector proteins that target the infected host cells. The outer-membrane autotransporter proteinsare also an effective mechanism of delivering virulence factors involved in colonization, disease progression, and1020 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5immune system evasion.Other species associated with NGU include Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and Mycoplasmahominis. These bacteria are commonly found in the normal microbiota of healthy individuals, who may acquire themduring birth or through sexual contact, but they can sometimes cause infections leading to urethritis (in males andfemales) or vaginitis and cervicitis (in females).M. genitalium is a more common cause of urethritis in most settings than N. gonorrhoeae, although it is lesscommon than C. trachomatis. It is responsible for approximately 30% of recurrent or persistent infections, 20–25% ofnonchlamydial NGU cases, and 15%–20% of NGU cases. M. genitalium attaches to epithelial cells and has substantialantigenic variation that helps it evade host immune responses. It has lipid-associated membrane proteins that areinvolved in causing inflammation.Several possible virulence factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of U. urealyticum (Figure 23.7). Theseinclude the ureaplasma proteins phospholipase A, phospholipase C, multiple banded antigen (MBA), urease, andimmunoglobulin α protease. The phospholipases are virulence factors that damage the cytoplasmic membrane oftarget cells. The immunoglobulin α protease is an important defense against antibodies. It can generate hydrogenperoxide, which may adversely affect host cell membranes through the production of reactive oxygen species.Treatments differ for gonorrheal and nongonococcal urethritis. However, N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis areoften simultaneously present, which is an important consideration for treatment. NGU is most commonly treatedusing tetracyclines (such as doxycycline) and azithromycin; erythromycin is an alternative option. Tetracyclines andfluoroquinolones are most commonly used to treat U. urealyticum, but resistance to tetracyclines is becoming anincreasing problem.[4] While tetracyclines have been the treatment of choice for M. hominis, increasing resistancemeans that other options must be used. Clindamycin and fluoroquinolones are alternatives. M. genitalium is generallysusceptible to doxycycline, azithromycin, and moxifloxacin. Like other mycoplasma, M. genitalium does not have acell wall and therefore β-lactams (including penicillins and cephalosporins) are not effective treatments.Figure 23.7 Ureaplasma urealyticum microcolonies (white arrows) on agar surface after anaerobic incubation,visualized using phase contrast microscopy (800×). The black arrow indicates cellular debris. (credit: modification ofwork by American Society for Microbiology)• What are the three most common causes of urethritis?• What three members of the normal microbiota can cause urethritis?4. Ken B Waites. “Ureaplasma Infection Medication.” Medscape, 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/231470-medication.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1021Bacterial Infections of the Urinary TractUrinary tract infections can cause inflammation of the urethra (urethritis), bladder (cystitis), and kidneys(pyelonephritis), and can sometimes spread to other body systems through the bloodstream. Figure 23.8captures the most important features of various types of UTIs.Figure 23.8Disease Profile1022 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.523.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that can cause infections of the reproductive system• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the reproductive systemIn addition to infections of the urinary tract, bacteria commonly infect the reproductive tract. As with the urinary tract,parts of the reproductive system closest to the external environment are the most likely sites of infection. Often, thesame microbes are capable of causing urinary tract and reproductive tract infections.Bacterial Vaginitis and VaginosisInflammation of the vagina is called vaginitis, often caused by a bacterial infection. It is also possible to have animbalance in the normal vaginal microbiota without inflammation called bacterial vaginosis (BV). Vaginosis maybe asymptomatic or may cause mild symptoms such as a thin, white-to-yellow, homogeneous vaginal discharge,burning, odor, and itching. The major causative agent is Gardnerella vaginalis, a gram-variable to gram-negativepleomorphic bacterium. Other causative agents include anaerobic species such as members of the genera Bacteroidesand Fusobacterium. Additionally, ureaplasma and mycoplasma may be involved. The disease is usually self-limiting,although antibiotic treatment is recommended if symptoms develop.G. vaginalis appears to be more virulent than other vaginal bacterial species potentially associated with BV. LikeLactobacillus spp., G. vaginalis is part of the normal vaginal microbiota, but when the population of Lactobacillusspp. decreases and the vaginal pH increases, G. vaginalis flourishes, causing vaginosis by attaching to vaginalepithelial cells and forming a thick protective biofilm. G. vaginalis also produces a cytotoxin called vaginolysin thatlyses vaginal epithelial cells and red blood cells.Since G. vaginalis can also be isolated from healthy women, the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of BV is directexamination of vaginal secretions and not the culture of G. vaginalis. Diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis from vaginalsecretions can be accurately made in three ways. The first is to use a DNA probe. The second method is to assayfor sialidase activity (sialidase is an enzyme produced by G. vaginalis and other bacteria associated with vaginosis,including Bacteroides spp., Prevotella spp., and Mobiluncus spp.). The third method is to assess gram-stained vaginalsmears for microscopic morphology and relative numbers and types of bacteria, squamous epithelial cells, andleukocytes. By examining slides prepared from vaginal swabs, it is possible to distinguish lactobacilli (long, grampositiverods) from other gram-negative species responsible for BV. A shift in predominance from gram-positivebacilli to gram-negative coccobacilli can indicate BV. Additionally, the slide may contain so-called clue cells, whichare epithelial cells that appear to have a granular or stippled appearance due to bacterial cells attached to their surface(Figure 23.9). Presumptive diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis can involve an assessment of clinical symptoms andevaluation of vaginal fluids using Amsel’s diagnostic criteria which include 3 out of 4 of the following characteristics:1. white to yellow discharge;2. a fishy odor, most noticeable when 10% KOH is added;3. pH greater than 4.5;4. the presence of clue cells.Treatment is often unnecessary because the infection often clears on its own. However, in some cases, antibiotics suchas topical or oral clindamycin or metronidazole may be prescribed. Alternative treatments include oral tinidazole orclindamycin ovules (vaginal suppositories).Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1023Figure 23.9 In this vaginal smear, the cell at the lower left is a clue cell with a unique appearance caused by thepresence of bacteria on the cell. The cell on the right is a normal cell.• Explain the difference between vaginosis and vaginitis.• What organisms are responsible for vaginosis and what organisms typically hold it at bay?Part 2There is no catch-all test for STIs, so several tests, in addition to a physical exam, are necessary to diagnosean infection. Nadia tries to relax in the exam room while she waits for the doctor to return, but she is nervousabout the results.When the doctor finally returns, she has some unexpected news: Nadia is pregnant. Surprised and excited,Nadia wants to know if the pregnancy explains her unusual symptoms. The doctor explains that the irritationthat Nadia is experiencing is vaginitis, which can be caused by several types of microorganisms. Onepossibility is bacterial vaginosis, which develops when there is an imbalance in the bacteria in the vagina, asoften occurs during pregnancy. Vaginosis can increase the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight, and afew studies have also shown that it can cause second-trimester miscarriage; however, the condition can betreated. To check for it, the doctor has asked the lab to perform a Gram stain on Nadia’s sample.• What result would you expect from the Gram stain if Nadia has bacterial vaginosis?Clinical Focus1024 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What is the relationship between pregnancy, estrogen levels, and development of bacterial vaginosis?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.GonorrheaAlso known as the clap, gonorrhea is a common sexually transmitted disease of the reproductive system that isespecially prevalent in individuals between the ages of 15 and 24. It is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae, oftencalled gonococcus or GC, which have fimbriae that allow the cells to attach to epithelial cells. It also has a typeof lipopolysaccharide endotoxin called lipooligosaccharide as part of the outer membrane structure that enhancesits pathogenicity. In addition to causing urethritis, N. gonorrhoeae can infect other body tissues such as the skin,meninges, pharynx, and conjunctiva.Many infected individuals (both men and women) are asymptomatic carriers of gonorrhea. When symptoms do occur,they manifest differently in males and females. Males may develop pain and burning during urination and dischargefrom the penis that may be yellow, green, or white (Figure 23.10). Less commonly, the testicles may becomeswollen or tender. Over time, these symptoms can increase and spread. In some cases, chronic infection develops. Thedisease can also develop in the rectum, causing symptoms such as discharge, soreness, bleeding, itching, and pain(especially in association with bowel movements).Figure 23.10 (a) Clinical photograph of gonococcal discharge from penis. The lesions on the skin could indicate coinfectionwith another STI. (b) Purulent discharge originating from the cervix and accumulating in the vagina of apatient with gonorrhea. (c) A micrograph of urethral discharge shows gram-negative diplococci (paired cells) bothinside and outside the leukocytes (large cells with lobed nuclei). These results could be used to diagnose gonorrheain a male patient, but female vaginal samples may contain other Neisseria spp. even if the patient is not infected withN. gonorrhoeae. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c:modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Women may develop pelvic pain, discharge from the vagina, intermenstrual bleeding (i.e., bleeding not associatedwith normal menstruation), and pain or irritation associated with urination. As with men, the infection can becomechronic. In women, however, chronic infection can cause increases in menstrual flow. Rectal infection can also occur,with the symptoms previously described for men. Infections that spread to the endometrium and fallopian tubescan cause pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), characterized by pain in the lower abdominal region, dysuria, vaginalChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1025discharge, and fever. PID can also lead to infertility through scarring and blockage of the fallopian tubes (salpingitis);it may also increase the risk of a life-threatening ectopic pregnancy, which occurs when a fertilized egg beginsdeveloping somewhere other than the uterus (e.g., in the fallopian tube or ovary).When a gonorrhea infection disseminates throughout the body, serious complications can develop. The infectionmay spread through the blood (bacteremia) and affect organs throughout the body, including the heart (gonorrhealendocarditis), joints (gonorrheal arthritis), and meninges encasing the brain (meningitis).Urethritis caused by N. gonorrhoeae can be difficult to treat due to antibiotic resistance (see Micro Connections).Some strains have developed resistance to the fluoroquinolones, so cephalosporins are often a first choice fortreatment. Because co-infection with C. trachomatis is common, the CDC recommends treating with a combinationregimen of ceftriaxone and azithromycin. Treatment of sexual partners is also recommended to avoid reinfection andspread of infection to others.[5]• What are some of the serious consequences of a gonorrhea infection?• What organism commonly coinfects with N. gonorrhoeae?Antibiotic Resistance in NeisseriaAntibiotic resistance in many pathogens is steadily increasing, causing serious concern throughout the publichealth community. Increased resistance has been especially notable in some species, such as Neisseriagonorrhoeae. The CDC monitors the spread of antibiotic resistance in N. gonorrhoeae, which it classifies asan urgent threat, and makes recommendations for treatment. So far, N. gonorrhoeae has shown resistance tocefixime (a cephalosporin), ceftriaxone (another cephalosporin), azithromycin, and tetracycline. Resistance totetracycline is the most common, and was seen in 188,600 cases of gonorrhea in 2011 (out of a total 820,000cases). In 2011, some 246,000 cases of gonorrhea involved strains of N. gonorrhoeae that were resistantto at least one antibiotic.[6] These resistance genes are spread by plasmids, and a single bacterium may beresistant to multiple antibiotics. The CDC currently recommends treatment with two medications, ceftriaxoneand azithromycin, to attempt to slow the spread of resistance. If resistance to cephalosporins increases, it willbe extremely difficult to control the spread of N. gonorrhoeae.ChlamydiaChlamydia trachomatis is the causative agent of the STI chlamydia (Figure 23.11). While many Chlamydiainfections are asymptomatic, chlamydia is a major cause of nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) and may also causeepididymitis and orchitis in men. In women, chlamydia infections can cause urethritis, salpingitis, and PID. Inaddition, chlamydial infections may be associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer.Because chlamydia is widespread, often asymptomatic, and has the potential to cause substantial complications,routine screening is recommended for sexually active women who are under age 25, at high risk (i.e., not in amonogamous relationship), or beginning prenatal care.Micro Connections5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Gonococcal Infections,” 2015.http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/gonorrhea.htm.6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2013,” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf.1026 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Certain serovars of C. trachomatis can cause an infection of the lymphatic system in the groin known aslymphogranuloma venereum. This condition is commonly found in tropical regions and can also co-occur inconjunction with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. After the microbes invade the lymphatic system,buboes (large lymph nodes, see Figure 23.11) form and can burst, releasing pus through the skin. The male genitalscan become greatly enlarged and in women the rectum may become narrow.Urogenital infections caused by C. trachomatis can be treated using azithromycin or doxycycline (the recommendedregimen from the CDC). Erythromycin, levofloxacin, and ofloxacin are alternatives.Figure 23.11 (a) Chlamydia trachomatis inclusion bodies within McCoy cell monolayers. Inclusion bodies aredistinguished by their brown color. (b) Lymphogranuloma venereum infection can cause swollen lymph nodes in thegroin called buboes. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:modification of work by Herbert L. Fred and Hendrik A. van Dijk)• Compare the signs and symptoms of chlamydia infection in men and women.SyphilisSyphilis is spread through direct physical (generally sexual) contact, and is caused by the gram-negative spirocheteTreponema pallidum. T. pallidum has a relatively simple genome and lacks lipopolysaccharide endotoxincharacteristic of gram-negative bacteria. However, it does contain lipoproteins that trigger an immune response in thehost, causing tissue damage that may enhance the pathogen’s ability to disseminate while evading the host immunesystem.After entering the body, T. pallidum moves rapidly into the bloodstream and other tissues. If not treated effectively,syphilis progresses through three distinct stages: primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary syphilis appears as a singlelesion on the cervix, penis, or anus within 10 to 90 days of transmission. Such lesions contain many T. pallidum cellsand are highly infectious. The lesion, called a hard chancre, is initially hard and painless, but it soon develops intoan ulcerated sore (Figure 23.12). Localized lymph node swelling may occur as well. In some cases, these symptomsmay be relatively mild, and the lesion may heal on its own within two to six weeks. Because the lesions are painlessand often occur in hidden locations (e.g., the cervix or anus), infected individuals sometimes do not notice them.The secondary stage generally develops once the primary chancre has healed or begun to heal. Secondary syphilis ischaracterized by a rash that affects the skin and mucous membranes of the mouth, vagina, or anus. The rash oftenbegins on the palms or the soles of the feet and spreads to the trunk and the limbs (Figure 23.12). The rash maytake many forms, such as macular or papular. On mucous membranes, it may manifest as mucus patches or white,wartlike lesions called condylomata lata. The rash may be accompanied by malaise, fever, and swelling of lymphChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1027nodes. Individuals are highly contagious in the secondary stage, which lasts two to six weeks and is recurrent in about25% of cases.After the secondary phase, syphilis can enter a latent phase, in which there are no symptoms but microbial levelsremain high. Blood tests can still detect the disease during latency. The latent phase can persist for years.Tertiary syphilis, which may occur 10 to 20 years after infection, produces the most severe symptoms and can befatal. Granulomatous lesions called gummas may develop in a variety of locations, including mucous membranes,bones, and internal organs (Figure 23.12). Gummas can be large and destructive, potentially causing massive tissuedamage. The most deadly lesions are those of the cardiovascular system (cardiovascular syphilis) and the centralnervous system (neurosyphilis). Cardiovascular syphilis can result in a fatal aortic aneurysm (rupture of the aorta)or coronary stenosis (a blockage of the coronary artery). Damage to the central nervous system can cause dementia,personality changes, seizures, general paralysis, speech impairment, loss of vision and hearing, and loss of bowel andbladder control.Figure 23.12 (a) This ulcerated sore is a hard chancre caused by syphilis. (b) This individual has a secondarysyphilis rash on the hands. (c) Tertiary syphilis produces lesions called gummas, such as this one located on thenose. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)The recommended methods for diagnosing early syphilis are darkfield or brightfield (silver stain) microscopy oftissue or exudate from lesions to detect T. pallidum (Figure 23.13). If these methods are not available, two typesof serologic tests (treponemal and nontreponemal) can be used for a presumptive diagnosis once the spirochete hasspread in the body. Nontreponemal serologic tests include the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) andrapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests. These are similar screening tests that detect nonspecific antibodies (those for lipidantigens produced during infection) rather than those produced against the spirochete. Treponemal serologic testsmeasure antibodies directed against T. pallidum antigens using particle agglutination (T. pallidum passive particleagglutination or TP-PA), immunofluorescence (the fluorescent T. pallidum antibody absorption or FTA-ABS), variousenzyme reactions (enzyme immunoassays or EIAs) and chemiluminescence immunoassays (CIA). Confirmatorytesting, rather than screening, must be done using treponemal rather than nontreponemal tests because only the formertests for antibodies to spirochete antigens. Both treponemal and nontreponemal tests should be used (as opposed tojust one) since both tests have limitations than can result in false positives or false negatives.Neurosyphilis cannot be diagnosed using a single test. With or without clinical signs, it is generally necessary toassess a variety of factors, including reactive serologic test results, cerebrospinal fluid cell count abnormalities,cerebrospinal fluid protein abnormalities, or reactive VDRL-CSF (the VDRL test of cerebrospinal fluid). The VDRLCSFis highly specific, but not sufficiently sensitive for conclusive diagnosis.The recommended treatment for syphilis is parenteral penicillin G (especially long-acting benzathine penicillin,although the exact choice depends on the stage of disease). Other options include tetracycline and doxycycline.1028 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.13 (a) Darkfield micrograph of Treponema pallidum. (b) Silver stain micrograph of the same species.(credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Congenital SyphilisCongenital syphilis is passed by mother to fetus when untreated primary or secondary syphilis is present. In manycases, infection may lead to miscarriage or stillbirth. Children born with congenital syphilis show symptoms ofsecondary syphilis and may develop mucus patches that deform the nose. In infants, gummas can cause significanttissue damage to organs and teeth. Many other complications may develop, such as osteochondritis, anemia,blindness, bone deformations, neurosyphilis, and cardiovascular lesions. Because congenital syphilis poses such arisk to the fetus, expectant mothers are screened for syphilis infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as partof the TORCH panel of prenatal tests.• What aspect of tertiary syphilis can lead to death?• How do treponemal serologic tests detect an infection?ChancroidThe sexually transmitted infection chancroid is caused by the gram-negative rod Haemophilus ducreyi. It ischaracterized by soft chancres (Figure 23.14) on the genitals or other areas associated with sexual contact, such asthe mouth and anus. Unlike the hard chancres associated with syphilis, soft chancres develop into painful, open soresthat may bleed or produce fluid that is highly contagious. In addition to causing chancres, the bacteria can invade thelymph nodes, potentially leading to pus discharge through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin. Like other genitallesions, soft chancres are of particular concern because they compromise the protective barriers of the skin or mucousmembranes, making individuals more susceptible to HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.Several virulence factors have been associated with H. ducreyi, including lipooligosaccharides, protective outermembrane proteins, antiphagocytic proteins, secretory proteins, and collagen-specific adhesin NcaA. The collagenspecificadhesion NcaA plays an important role in initial cellular attachment and colonization. Outer membraneproteins DsrA and DltA have been shown to provide protection from serum-mediated killing by antibodies andcomplement.H. ducreyi is difficult to culture; thus, diagnosis is generally based on clinical observation of genital ulcers and teststhat rule out other diseases with similar ulcers, such as syphilis and genital herpes. PCR tests for H. ducreyi havebeen developed in some laboratories, but as of 2015 none had been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration(FDA).[7] Recommended treatments for chancroid include antibiotics such as azithromycin, ciprofloxacin,Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1029erythromycin and ceftriaxone. Resistance to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin has been reported.[8]Figure 23.14 (a) A soft chancre on the penis of a man with chancroid. (b) Chancroid is caused by the gram-negativebacterium Haemophilus ducreyi, seen here in a gram-stained culture of rabbit blood. (credit a, b: modification of workby Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What is the key difference between chancroid lesions and those associated with syphilis?• Why is it difficult to definitively diagnose chancroid?Bacterial Reproductive Tract InfectionsMany bacterial infections affecting the reproductive system are transmitted through sexual contact, but somecan be transmitted by other means. In the United States, gonorrhea and chlamydia are common illnesseswith incidences of about 350,000 and 1.44 million, respectively, in 2014. Syphilis is a rarer disease with anincidence of 20,000 in 2014. Chancroid is exceedingly rare in the United States with only six cases in 2014and a median of 10 cases per year for the years 2010–2014.[9] Figure 23.15 summarizes bacterial infectionsof the reproductive tract.Disease Profile7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Chancroid,” 2015.http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/chancroid.htm.8. Ibid.9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2014 Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats14/default.htm.1030 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.15Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 103123.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common viruses that cause infections of the reproductive system• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the reproductive systemSeveral viruses can cause serious problems for the human reproductive system. Most of these viral infections areincurable, increasing the risk of persistent sexual transmission. In addition, such viral infections are very commonin the United States. For example, human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common STI in the country, with anestimated prevalence of 79.1 million infections in 2008; herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) is the next most prevalentSTI at 24.1 million infections.[10] In this section, we will examine these and other major viral infections of thereproductive system.Genital HerpesGenital herpes is a common condition caused by the herpes simplex virus (Figure 23.16), an enveloped, doublestrandedDNA virus that is classified into two distinct types. Herpes simplex virus has several virulence factors,including infected cell protein (ICP) 34.5, which helps in replication and inhibits the maturation of dendritic cells asa mechanism of avoiding elimination by the immune system. In addition, surface glycoproteins on the viral envelopepromote the coating of herpes simplex virus with antibodies and complement factors, allowing the virus to appear as“self” and prevent immune system activation and elimination.There are two herpes simplex virus types. While herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is generally associated withoral lesions like cold sores or fever blisters (see Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes), herpes simplex virustype 2 (HSV-2) is usually associated with genital herpes. However, both viruses can infect either location as well asother parts of the body. Oral-genital contact can spread either virus from the mouth to the genital region or vice versa.Figure 23.16 Virions of the herpes simplex virus are shown here in this transmission electron micrograph. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Many infected individuals do not develop symptoms, and thus do not realize that they carry the virus. However, insome infected individuals, fever, chills, malaise, swollen lymph nodes, and pain precede the development of fluidfilledvesicles that may be irritating and uncomfortable. When these vesicles burst, they release infectious fluid andallow transmission of HSV. In addition, open herpes lesions can increase the risk of spreading or acquiring HIV.In men, the herpes lesions typically develop on the penis and may be accompanied by a watery discharge. In women,the vesicles develop most commonly on the vulva, but may also develop on the vagina or cervix (Figure 23.17).10. Catherine Lindsey Satterwhite, Elizabeth Torrone, Elissa Meites, Eileen F. Dunne, Reena Mahajan, M. Cheryl Bañez Ocfemia, John Su,Fujie Xu, and Hillard Weinstock. “Sexually Transmitted Infections Among US Women and Men: Prevalence and Incidence Estimates, 2008.”Sexually Transmitted Diseases 40, no. 3 (2013): 187–193.1032 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5The symptoms are typically mild, although the lesions may be irritating or accompanied by urinary discomfort. Useof condoms may not always be an effective means of preventing transmission of genital herpes since the lesions canoccur on areas other than the genitals.Figure 23.17 Genital herpes is typically characterized by lesions on the genitals (left), but lesions can also appearelsewhere on the skin or mucous membranes (right). The lesions can be large and painful or small and easilyoverlooked. (credit b: modification of work by Schiffer JT, Swan D, Al Sallaq R, Magaret A, Johnston C, Mark KE,Selke S, Ocbamichael N, Kuntz S, Zhu J, Robinson B, Huang ML, Jerome KR, Wald A, and Corey)Herpes simplex viruses can cause recurrent infections because the virus can become latent and then be reactivated.This occurs more commonly with HSV-2 than with HSV-1.[11] The virus moves down peripheral nerves, typicallysensory neurons, to ganglia in the spine (either the trigeminal ganglion or the lumbar-sacral ganglia) and becomeslatent. Reactivation can later occur, causing the formation of new vesicles. HSV-2 most effectively reactivatesfrom the lumbar-sacral ganglia. Not everyone infected with HSV-2 experiences reactivations, which are typicallyassociated with stressful conditions, and the frequency of reactivation varies throughout life and among individuals.Between outbreaks or when there are no obvious vesicles, the virus can still be transmitted.Virologic and serologic techniques are used for diagnosis. The virus may be cultured from lesions. Theimmunostaining methods that are used to detect virus from cultures generally require less expertise than methodsbased on cytopathic effect (CPE), as well as being a less expensive option. However, PCR or other DNA amplificationmethods may be preferred because they provide the most rapid results without waiting for culture amplification. PCRis also best for detecting systemic infections. Serologic techniques are also useful in some circumstances, such aswhen symptoms persist but PCR testing is negative.While there is no cure or vaccine for HSV-2 infections, antiviral medications are available that manage the infectionby keeping the virus in its dormant or latent phase, reducing signs and symptoms. If the medication is discontinued,then the condition returns to its original severity. The recommended medications, which may be taken at the start ofan outbreak or daily as a method of prophylaxis, are acyclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir.Neonatal HerpesHerpes infections in newborns, referred to as neonatal herpes, are generally transmitted from the mother to theneonate during childbirth, when the child is exposed to pathogens in the birth canal. Infections can occur regardlessof whether lesions are present in the birth canal. In most cases, the infection of the newborn is limited to skin, mucousmembranes, and eyes, and outcomes are good. However, sometimes the virus becomes disseminated and spreads tothe central nervous system, resulting in motor function deficits or death.In some cases, infections can occur before birth when the virus crosses the placenta. This can cause seriouscomplications in fetal development and may result in spontaneous abortion or severe disabilities if the fetus survives.The condition is most serious when the mother is infected with HSV for the first time during pregnancy. Thus,11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Disease Treatment Guidelines: Genital Herpes,” 2015.http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/herpes.htm.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1033expectant mothers are screened for HSV infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the TORCH panelof prenatal tests (see How Pathogens Cause Disease). Systemic acyclovir treatment is recommended to treatnewborns with neonatal herpes.• Why are latent herpes virus infections still of clinical concern?• How is neonatal herpes contracted?Human PapillomasWarts of all types are caused by a variety of strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) (see Viral Infections of theSkin and Eyes). Condylomata acuminata, more commonly called genital warts or venereal warts (Figure 23.18),are an extremely prevalent STI caused by certain strains of HPV. Condylomata are irregular, soft, pink growths thatare found on external genitalia or the anus.HPV is a small, non-enveloped virus with a circular double-stranded DNA genome. Researchers have identified over200 different strains (called types) of HPV, with approximately 40 causing STIs. While some types of HPV causegenital warts, HPV infection is often asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, genital HPV infection often co-occurswith other STIs like syphilis or gonorrhea. Additionally, some forms of HPV (not the same ones associated withgenital warts) are associated with cervical cancers. At least 14 oncogenic (cancer-causing) HPV types are knownto have a causal association with cervical cancers. Examples of oncogenic HPV are types 16 and 18, which areassociated with 70% of cervical cancers.[12] Oncogenic HPV types can also cause oropharyngeal cancer, anal cancer,vaginal cancer, vulvar cancer, and penile cancer. Most of these cancers are caused by HPV type 16. HPV virulencefactors include proteins (E6 and E7) that are capable of inactivating tumor suppressor proteins, leading to uncontrolledcell division and the development of cancer.HPV cannot be cultured, so molecular tests are the primary method used to detect HPV. While routine HPV screeningis not recommended for men, it is included in guidelines for women. An initial screening for HPV at age 30,conducted at the same time as a Pap test, is recommended. If the tests are negative, then further HPV testing isrecommended every five years. More frequent testing may be needed in some cases. The protocols used to collect,transport, and store samples vary based on both the type of HPV testing and the purpose of the testing. This shouldbe determined in individual cases in consultation with the laboratory that will perform the testing.Because HPV testing is often conducted concurrently with Pap testing, the most common approach uses a singlesample collection within one vial for both. This approach uses liquid-based cytology (LBC). The samples are thenused for Pap smear cytology as well as HPV testing and genotyping. HPV can be recognized in Pap smears by thepresence of cells called koilocytes (called koilocytosis or koilocytotic atypia). Koilocytes have a hyperchromaticatypical nucleus that stains darkly and a high ratio of nuclear material to cytoplasm. There is a distinct clearappearance around the nucleus called a perinuclear halo (Figure 23.19).12. Lauren Thaxton and Alan G. Waxman. “Cervical Cancer Prevention: Immunization and Screening 2015.” Medical Clinics of NorthAmerica 99, no. 3 (2015): 469–477.1034 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.18 Genital warts may occur around the anus (left) or genitalia (right). (credit left, right: modification ofwork by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Figure 23.19 In this image, the cervical cells on the left are normal and those on the right show enlarged nuclei andhyperchromasia (darkly stained nuclei) typical of HPV-infected koilocytes. (credit: modification of work by Ed Uthman)Most HPV infections resolve spontaneously; however, various therapies are used to treat and remove warts. Topicalmedications such as imiquimod (which stimulates the production of interferon), podofilox, or sinecatechins, may beeffective. Warts can also be removed using cryotherapy or surgery, but these approaches are less effective for genitalwarts than for other types of warts. Electrocauterization and carbon dioxide laser therapy are also used for wartremoval.Regular Pap testing can detect abnormal cells that might progress to cervical cancer, followed by biopsy andappropriate treatment. Vaccines for some of the high risk HPV types are now available. Gardasil vaccine includestypes 6, 11, 16 and 18 (types 6 and 11 are associated with 90% of genital wart infections and types 16 and 18 areassociated with 70% of cervical cancers). Gardasil 9 vaccinates against the previous four types and an additional fivehigh-risk types (31, 33, 45, 52, and 58). Cervarix vaccine includes just HPV types 16 and 18. Vaccination is the mosteffective way to prevent infection with oncogenic HPV, but it is important to note that not all oncogenic HPV typesare covered by the available vaccines. It is recommended for both boys and girls prior to sexual activity (usuallybetween the ages of nine and fifteen).Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1035Watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/22HPVpercep) of how perceptions ofHPV affect vaccination rates.• What is diagnostic of an HPV infection in a Pap smear?• What is the motivation for HPV vaccination?Secret STIsFew people who have an STI (or think they may have one) are eager to share that information publicly. In fact,many patients are even uncomfortable discussing the symptoms privately with their doctors. Unfortunately, thesocial stigma associated with STIs makes it harder for infected individuals to seek the treatment they need andcreates the false perception that STIs are rare. In reality, STIs are quite common, but it is difficult to determineexactly how common.A recent study on the effects of HPV vaccination found a baseline HPV prevalence of 26.8% for womenbetween the ages of 14 and 59. Among women aged 20–24, the prevalence was 44.8%; in other words, almosthalf of the women in this age bracket had a current infection.[13] According to the CDC, HSV-2 infection wasestimated to have a prevalence of 15.5% in younger individuals (14–49 years of age) in 2007–2010, down from20.3% in the same age group in 1988–1994. However, the CDC estimates that 87.4% of infected individuals inthis age group have not been diagnosed by a physician.[14]Another complicating factor is that many STIs can be asymptomatic or have long periods of latency. Forexample, the CDC estimates that among women ages 14–49 in the United States, about 2.3 million (3.1%) areinfected with the sexually transmitted protozoan Trichomonas (see Protozoan Infections of the UrogenitalSystem); however, in a study of infected women, 85% of those diagnosed with the infection wereasymptomatic.[15]Even when patients are treated for symptomatic STIs, it can be difficult to obtain accurate data on thenumber of cases. Whereas STIs like chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis are notifiable diseases—meaningeach diagnosis must be reported by healthcare providers to the CDC—other STIs are not notifiable (e.g.,genital herpes, genital warts, and trichomoniasis). Between the social taboos, the inconsistency of symptoms,and the lack of mandatory reporting, it can be difficult to estimate the true prevalence of STIs—but it is safe tosay they are much more prevalent than most people think.Link to LearningMicro Connections13. Eileen F. Dunne, Elizabeth R. Unger, Maya Sternberg, Geraldine McQuillan, David C. Swan, Sonya S. Patel, and Lauri E. Markowitz.“Prevalence of HPV Infection Among Females in the United States.” Journal of the American Medical Association 297, no. 8 (2007):813–819.14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Genital Herpes - CDC Fact Sheet,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/herpes/stdfact-herpesdetailed.htm.15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Trichomoniasis Statistics,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/trichomonas/stats.htm.1036 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Viral Reproductive Tract InfectionsFigure 23.20 summarizes the most important features of viral diseases affecting the human reproductive tract.Figure 23.2023.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive SystemLearning Objectives• Summarize the important characteristics of vaginal candidiasisOnly one major fungal pathogen affects the urogenital system. Candida is a genus of fungi capable of existing ina yeast form or as a multicellular fungus. Candida spp. are commonly found in the normal, healthy microbiotaof the skin, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory system, and female urogenital tract (Figure 23.21). They can bepathogenic due to their ability to adhere to and invade host cells, form biofilms, secrete hydrolases (e.g., proteases,phospholipases, and lipases) that assist in their spread through tissues, and change their phenotypes to protectthemselves from the immune system. However, they typically only cause disease in the female reproductive tractunder conditions that compromise the host’s defenses. While there are at least 20 Candida species of clinicalimportance, C. albicans is the species most commonly responsible for fungal vaginitis.Disease ProfileChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1037As discussed earlier, lactobacilli in the vagina inhibit the growth of other organisms, including bacteria and Candida,but disruptions can allow Candida to increase in numbers. Typical disruptions include antibiotic therapy, illness(especially diabetes), pregnancy, and the presence of transient microbes. Immunosuppression can also play a role, andthe severe immunosuppression associated with HIV infection often allows Candida to thrive. This can cause genitalor vaginal candidiasis, a condition characterized by vaginitis and commonly known as a yeast infection. When a yeastinfection develops, inflammation occurs along with symptoms of pruritus (itching), a thick white or yellow discharge,and odor.Other forms of candidiasis include cutaneous candidiasis (see Mycoses of the Skin) and oral thrush (seeMicrobial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity). Although Candida spp. are found in the normalmicrobiota, Candida spp. may also be transmitted between individuals. Sexual contact is a common mode oftransmission, although candidiasis is not considered an STI.Diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis can be made using microscopic evaluation of vaginal secretions to determinewhether there is an excess of Candida. Culturing approaches are less useful because Candida is part of the normalmicrobiota and will regularly appear. It is also easy to contaminate samples with Candida because it is so common,so care must be taken to handle clinical material appropriately. Samples can be refrigerated if there is a delay inhandling. Candida is a dimorphic fungus, so it does not only exist in a yeast form; cultivation can be used to identifychlamydospores and pseudohyphae, which develop from germ tubes (Figure 23.22). The presence of the germtube can be used in a diagnostic test in which cultured yeast cells are combined with rabbit serum and observedafter a few hours for the presence of germ tubes. Molecular tests are also available if needed. The Affirm VPIIMicrobial Identification Test, for instance, tests simultaneously for the vaginal microbes C. albicans, G. vaginalis(see Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System), and Trichomonas vaginalis (see Protozoan Infections ofthe Urogenital System).Topical antifungal medications for vaginal candidiasis include butoconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, tioconazole,and nystatin. Oral treatment with fluconazole can be used. There are often no clear precipitating factors for infection,so prevention is difficult.Figure 23.21 Candida blastospores (asexual spores that result from budding) and chlamydospores (resting sporesproduced through asexual reproduction) are visible in this micrograph. (credit: modification of work by Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)1038 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.22 Candida can produce germ tubes, like the one in this micrograph, that develop into hyphae. (credit:modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)• What factors can lead to candidiasis?• How is candidiasis typically diagnosed?Part 3The Gram stain of Nadia’s vaginal smear showed that the concentration of lactobacilli relative to other speciesin Nadia’s vaginal sample was abnormally low. However, there were no clue cells visible, which suggests thatthe infection is not bacterial vaginosis. But a wet-mount slide showed an overgrowth of yeast cells, suggestingthat the problem is candidiasis, or a yeast infection (Figure 23.23). This, Nadia’s doctor assures her, is goodnews. Candidiasis is common during pregnancy and easily treatable.• Knowing that the problem is candidiasis, what treatments might the doctor suggest?Clinical FocusChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1039Figure 23.23 (a) Lactobacilli are visible as gram-positive rods on and around this squamous epithelial cell.(b) This wet mount prepared with KOH shows Candida albicans pseudohyphae and squamous epithelial cellsin a vaginal sample from a patient with candidiasis. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital SystemLearning Objectives• Identify the most common protozoan pathogen that causes infections of the reproductive system• Summarize the important characteristics of trichomoniasisOnly one major protozoan species causes infections in the urogenital system. Trichomoniasis, or “trich,” is the mostcommon nonviral STI and is caused by a flagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. T. vaginalis has an undulatingmembrane and, generally, an amoeboid shape when attached to cells in the vagina. In culture, it has an oval shape.T. vaginalis is commonly found in the normal microbiota of the vagina. As with other vaginal pathogens, it can causevaginitis when there is disruption to the normal microbiota. It is found only as a trophozoite and does not form cysts.T. vaginalis can adhere to cells using adhesins such as lipoglycans; it also has other cell-surface virulence factors,including tetraspanins that are involved in cell adhesion, motility, and tissue invasion. In addition, T. vaginalis iscapable of phagocytosing other microbes of the normal microbiota, contributing to the development of an imbalancethat is favorable to infection.Both men and women can develop trichomoniasis. Men are generally asymptomatic, and although women are morelikely to develop symptoms, they are often asymptomatic as well. When symptoms do occur, they are characteristicof urethritis. Men experience itching, irritation, discharge from the penis, and burning after urination or ejaculation.Women experience dysuria; itching, burning, redness, and soreness of the genitalia; and vaginal discharge. Theinfection may also spread to the cervix. Infection increases the risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV and is associatedwith pregnancy complications such as preterm birth.Microscopic evaluation of wet mounts is an inexpensive and convenient method of diagnosis, but the sensitivityof this method is low (Figure 23.24). Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) is preferred due to its highsensitivity. Using wet mounts and then NAAT for those who initially test negative is one option to improve sensitivity.1040 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Samples may be obtained for NAAT using urine, vaginal, or endocervical specimens for women and with urine andurethral swabs for men. It is also possible to use other methods such as the OSOM Trichomonas Rapid Test (animmunochromatographic test that detects antigen) and a DNA probe test for multiple species associated with vaginitis(the Affirm VPII Microbial Identification Test discussed in section 23.5).[16] T. vaginalis is sometimes detected on aPap test, but this is not considered diagnostic due to high rates of false positives and negatives. The recommendedtreatment for trichomoniasis is oral metronidazole or tinidazole. Sexual partners should be treated as well.Figure 23.24 Trichomonas vaginalis is visible in this Gram stained specimen. (credit: modification of work byAmerican Society for Microbiology)• What are the symptoms of trichomoniasis?STIs and PrivacyFor many STIs, it is common to contact and treat sexual partners of the patient. This is especially importantwhen a new illness has appeared, as when HIV became more prevalent in the 1980s. But to contact sexualpartners, it is necessary to obtain their personal information from the patient. This raises difficult questions. Insome cases, providing the information may be embarrassing or difficult for the patient, even though withholdingsuch information could put their sexual partner(s) at risk.Legal considerations further complicate such situations. The Health Insurance Portability and AccountabilityAct (HIPPA), passed into law in 1996, sets the standards for the protection of patient information. It requiresbusinesses that use health information, such as insurance companies and healthcare providers, to maintainstrict confidentiality of patient records. Contacting a patient’s sexual partners may therefore violate the patient’sprivacy rights if the patient’s diagnosis is revealed as a result.Eye on Ethics16. Association of Public Health Laboratories. “Advances in Laboratory Detection of Trichomonas vaginalis,” 2013. http://www.aphl.org/AboutAPHL/publications/Documents/ID_2013August_Advances-in-Laboratory-Detection-of-Trichomonas-vaginalis.pdf.Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1041From an ethical standpoint, which is more important: the patient’s privacy rights or the sexual partner’s rightto know that they may be at risk of a sexually transmitted disease? Does the answer depend on the severityof the disease or are the rules universal? Suppose the physician knows the identity of the sexual partner butthe patient does not want that individual to be contacted. Would it be a violation of HIPPA rules to contact theindividual without the patient’s consent?Questions related to patient privacy become even more complicated when dealing with patients who areminors. Adolescents may be reluctant to discuss their sexual behavior or health with a health professional,especially if they believe that healthcare professionals will tell their parents. This leaves many teens at riskof having an untreated infection or of lacking the information to protect themselves and their partners. On theother hand, parents may feel that they have a right to know what is going on with their child. How shouldphysicians handle this? Should parents always be told even if the adolescent wants confidentiality? Does thisaffect how the physician should handle notifying a sexual partner?ResolutionVaginal candidiasis is generally treated using topical antifungal medications such as butoconazole,miconazole, clotrimazole, ticonozole, nystatin, or oral fluconazole. However, it is important to be carefulin selecting a treatment for use during pregnancy. Nadia’s doctor recommended treatment with topicalclotrimazole. This drug is classified as a category B drug by the FDA for use in pregnancy, and there appearsto be no evidence of harm, at least in the second or third trimesters of pregnancy. Based on Nadia’s particularsituation, her doctor thought that it was suitable for very short-term use even though she was still in the firsttrimester. After a seven-day course of treatment, Nadia’s yeast infection cleared. She continued with a normalpregnancy and delivered a healthy baby eight months later.Higher levels of hormones during pregnancy can shift the typical microbiota composition and balance in thevagina, leading to high rates of infections such as candidiasis or vaginosis. Topical treatment has an 80–90%success rate, with only a small number of cases resulting in recurrent or persistent infections. Longer term orintermittent treatment is usually effective in these cases.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Fungal and Protozoan Reproductive Tract InfectionsFigure 23.25 summarizes the most important features of candidiasis and trichomoniasis.Clinical FocusDisease Profile1042 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 23.25Take an online quiz (https://openstax.org/l/22quizstireview) for a review ofsexually transmitted infections.Summary23.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital Tract• The urinary system is responsible for filtering the blood, excreting wastes, and helping to regulate electrolyteand water balance.• The urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra; the bladder and urethra arethe most common sites of infection.• Common sites of infection in the male reproductive system include the urethra, as well as the testes, prostateand epididymis.• The most commons sites of infection in the female reproductive system are the vulva, vagina, cervix, andLink to LearningChapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections 1043fallopian tubes.• Infections of the urogenital tract can occur through colonization from the external environment, alterationsin microbiota due to hormonal or other physiological and environmental changes, fecal contamination, andsexual transmission (STIs).23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System• Bacterial cystitis is commonly caused by fecal bacteria such as E. coli.• Pyelonephritis is a serious kidney infection that is often caused by bacteria that travel from infectionselsewhere in the urinary tract and may cause systemic complications.• Leptospirosis is a bacterial infection of the kidney that can be transmitted by exposure to infected animalurine, especially in contaminated water. It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates.• Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) is commonly caused by C. trachomatis, M. genitalium, Ureaplasmaurealyticum, and M. hominis.• Diagnosis and treatment for bacterial urinary tract infections varies. Urinalysis (e.g., for leukocyte esteraselevels, nitrite levels, microscopic evaluation, and culture of urine) is an important component in most cases.Broad-spectrum antibiotics are typically used.23.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System• Bacterial vaginosis is caused by an imbalance in the vaginal microbiota, with a decrease in lactobacilli andan increase in vaginal pH. G. vaginalis is the most common cause of bacterial vaginosis, which is associatedwith vaginal discharge, odor, burning, and itching.• Gonorrhea is caused by N. gonorrhoeae, which can cause infection of the reproductive and urinary tractsand is associated with symptoms of urethritis. If left untreated, it can progress to epididymitis, salpingitis, andpelvic inflammatory disease and enter the bloodstream to infect other sites in the body.• Chlamydia is the most commonly reported STI and is caused by C. trachomatis. Most infections areasymptomatic, and infections that are not treated can spread to involve the epididymis of men and causesalpingitis and pelvic inflammatory disease in women.• Syphilis is caused by T. pallidum and has three stages, primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary syphilis isassociated with a painless hard chancre lesion on genitalia. Secondary syphilis is associated with skin andmucous membrane lesions. Tertiary syphilis is the most serious and life-threatening, and can involve seriousnervous system damage.• Chancroid is an infection of the reproductive tract caused by H. ducreyi that results in the development ofcharacteristic soft chancres.23.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive System• Genital herpes is usually caused by HSV-2 (although HSV-1 can also be responsible) and may cause thedevelopment of infectious, potentially recurrent vesicles• Neonatal herpes can occur in babies born to infected mothers and can cause symptoms that range fromrelatively mild (more common) to severe.• Human papillomaviruses are the most common sexually transmitted viruses and include strains that causegenital warts as well as strains that cause cervical cancer.23.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System• Candida spp. are typically present in the normal microbiota in the body, including the skin, respiratory tract,gastrointestinal tract, and female urogenital system.• Disruptions in the normal vaginal microbiota can lead to an overgrowth of Candida, causing vaginalcandidiasis.• Vaginal candidiasis can be treated with topical or oral fungicides. Prevention is difficult.23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital System• Trichomoniasis is a common STI caused by Trichomonas vaginalis.1044 Chapter 23 | Urogenital System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• T. vaginalis is common at low levels in the normal microbiota.• Trichomoniasis is often asymptomatic. When symptoms develop, trichomoniasis causes urinary discomfort,irritation, itching, burning, discharge from the penis (in men), and vaginal discharge (in women).
Trichomoniasis is treated with the antiflagellate drugs tinidazole and metronidazole.