Chapter 11Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsFigure 11.1 Escherichia coli (left) may not appear to have much in common with an elephant (right), but the geneticblueprints for these vastly different organisms are both encoded in DNA. (credit left: modification of work by NIAID;credit right: modification of work by Tom Lubbock)Chapter Outline11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material11.2 DNA Replication11.3 RNA Transcription11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)11.5 Mutations11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon TheoryIntroductionIn 1954, French scientist and future Nobel laureate Jacques Monod (1910–1976) famously said, “What is truein E. coli is true in the elephant,” suggesting that the biochemistry of life was maintained throughout evolutionand is shared in all forms of known life. Since Monod’s famous statement, we have learned a great deal aboutthe mechanisms of gene regulation, expression, and replication in living cells. All cells use DNA for informationstorage, share the same genetic code, and use similar mechanisms to replicate and express it. Although many aspectsof genetics are universally shared, variations do exist among contemporary genetic systems. We now know thatwithin the shared overall theme of the genetic mechanism, there are significant differences among the three domainsof life: Eukarya, Archaea, and Bacteria. Additionally, viruses, cellular parasites but not themselves living cells,show dramatic variation in their genetic material and the replication and gene expression processes. Some of thesedifferences have allowed us to engineer clinical tools such as antibiotics and antiviral drugs that specifically inhibitthe reproduction of pathogens yet are harmless to their hosts.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 44511.1 The Functions of Genetic MaterialLearning Objectives• Explain the two functions of the genome• Explain the meaning of the central dogma of molecular biology• Differentiate between genotype and phenotype and explain how environmental factors influence phenotypeDNA serves two essential functions that deal with cellular information. First, DNA is the genetic material responsiblefor inheritance and is passed from parent to offspring for all life on earth. To preserve the integrity of this geneticinformation, DNA must be replicated with great accuracy, with minimal errors that introduce changes to the DNAsequence. A genome contains the full complement of DNA within a cell and is organized into smaller, discrete unitscalled genes that are arranged on chromosomes and plasmids. The second function of DNA is to direct and regulatethe construction of the proteins necessary to a cell for growth and reproduction in a particular cellular environment.A gene is composed of DNA that is “read” or transcribed to produce an RNA molecule during the process oftranscription. One major type of RNA molecule, called messenger RNA (mRNA), provides the information for theribosome to catalyze protein synthesis in a process called translation. The processes of transcription and translationare collectively referred to as gene expression. Gene expression is the synthesis of a specific protein with a sequenceof amino acids that is encoded in the gene. The flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein is describedby the central dogma (Figure 11.2). This central dogma of molecular biology further elucidates the mechanismbehind Beadle and Tatum’s “one gene-one enzyme” hypothesis (see Using Microorganisms to Discover theSecrets of Life). Each of the processes of replication, transcription, and translation includes the stages of 1)initiation, 2) elongation (polymerization), and 3) termination. These stages will be described in more detail in thischapter.Figure 11.2 The central dogma states that DNA encodes messenger RNA, which, in turn, encodes protein.A cell’s genotype is the full collection of genes it contains, whereas its phenotype is the set of observablecharacteristics that result from those genes. The phenotype is the product of the array of proteins being produced byPart 1Mark is 60-year-old software engineer who suffers from type II diabetes, which he monitors and keeps undercontrol largely through diet and exercise. One spring morning, while doing some gardening, he scraped hislower leg while walking through blackberry brambles. He continued working all day in the yard and did notbother to clean the wound and treat it with antibiotic ointment until later that evening. For the next 2 days, hisleg became increasingly red, swollen, and warm to the touch. It was sore not only on the surface, but deep inthe muscle. After 24 hours, Mark developed a fever and stiffness in the affected leg. Feeling increasingly weak,he called a neighbor, who drove him to the emergency department.• Did Mark wait too long to seek medical attention? At what point do his signs and symptoms warrantseeking medical attention?• What types of infections or other conditions might be responsible for Mark’s symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus446 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the cell at a given time, which is influenced by the cell’s genotype as well as interactions with the cell’s environment.Genes code for proteins that have functions in the cell. Production of a specific protein encoded by an individual geneoften results in a distinct phenotype for the cell compared with the phenotype without that protein. For this reason, itis also common to refer to the genotype of an individual gene and its phenotype. Although a cell’s genotype remainsconstant, not all genes are used to direct the production of their proteins simultaneously. Cells carefully regulateexpression of their genes, only using genes to make specific proteins when those proteins are needed (Figure 11.3).Figure 11.3 Phenotype is determined by the specific genes within a genotype that are expressed under specificconditions. Although multiple cells may have the same genotype, they may exhibit a wide range of phenotypesresulting from differences in patterns of gene expression in response to different environmental conditions.• What are the two functions of DNA?• Distinguish between the genotype and phenotype of a cell.• How can cells have the same genotype but differ in their phenotype?Use and Abuse of Genome DataWhy can some humans harbor opportunistic pathogens like Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus,or Streptococcus pyogenes, in their upper respiratory tracts but remain asymptomatic carriers, while otherindividuals become seriously ill when infected? There is evidence suggesting that differences in susceptibilityto infection between patients may be a result, at least in part, of genetic differences between human hosts. Forexample, genetic differences in human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) and red blood cell antigens among hostshave been implicated in different immune responses and resulting disease progression from infection with H.influenzae.Because the genetic interplay between pathogen and host may contribute to disease outcomes, understandingdifferences in genetic makeup between individuals may be an important clinical tool. Ecological genomicsis a relatively new field that seeks to understand how the genotypes of different organisms interact witheach other in nature. The field answers questions about how gene expression of one organism affects geneexpression of another. Medical applications of ecological genomics will focus on how pathogens interact withspecific individuals, as opposed to humans in general. Such analyses would allow medical professionals touse knowledge of an individual’s genotype to apply more individualized plans for treatment and prevention ofEye on EthicsChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 447disease.With the advent of next-generation sequencing, it is relatively easy to obtain the entire genomic sequences ofpathogens; a bacterial genome can be sequenced in as little as a day.[1] The speed and cost of sequencingthe human genome has also been greatly reduced and, already, individuals can submit samples to receiveextensive reports on their personal genetic traits, including ancestry and carrier status for various geneticdiseases. As sequencing technologies progress further, such services will continue to become less expensive,more extensive, and quicker.However, as this day quickly approaches, there are many ethical concerns with which society must grapple.For example, should genome sequencing be a standard practice for everybody? Should it be required by lawor by employers if it will lower health-care costs? If one refuses genome sequencing, does he or she forfeit hisor her right to health insurance coverage? For what purposes should the data be used? Who should overseeproper use of these data? If genome sequencing reveals predisposition to a particular disease, do insurancecompanies have the right to increase rates? Will employers treat an employee differently? Knowing thatenvironmental influences also affect disease development, how should the data on the presence of a particulardisease-causing allele in an individual be used ethically? The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of2008 (GINA) currently prohibits discriminatory practices based on genetic information by both health insurancecompanies and employers. However, GINA does not cover life, disability, or long-term care insurance policies.Clearly, all members of society must continue to engage in conversations about these issues so that suchgenomic data can be used to improve health care while simultaneously protecting an individual’s rights.11.2 DNA ReplicationLearning Objectives• Explain the meaning of semiconservative DNA replication• Explain why DNA replication is bidirectional and includes both a leading and lagging strand• Explain why Okazaki fragments are formed• Describe the process of DNA replication and the functions of the enzymes involved• Identify the differences between DNA replication in bacteria and eukaryotes• Explain the process of rolling circle replicationThe elucidation of the structure of the double helix by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 provided a hint as tohow DNA is copied during the process of replication. Separating the strands of the double helix would provide twotemplates for the synthesis of new complementary strands, but exactly how new DNA molecules were constructedwas still unclear. In one model, semiconservative replication, the two strands of the double helix separate duringDNA replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the new complementary strand is copied; afterreplication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. There were twocompeting models also suggested: conservative and dispersive, which are shown in Figure 11.4.1. D.J. Edwards, K.E. Holt. “Beginner’s Guide to Comparative Bacterial Genome Analysis Using Next-Generation Sequence Data.”Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 3 no. 1 (2013):2.448 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.4 There were three models suggested for DNA replication. In the conservative model, parental DNAstrands (blue) remained associated in one DNA molecule while new daughter strands (red) remained associated innewly formed DNA molecules. In the semiconservative model, parental strands separated and directed the synthesisof a daughter strand, with each resulting DNA molecule being a hybrid of a parental strand and a daughter strand. Inthe dispersive model, all resulting DNA strands have regions of double-stranded parental DNA and regions of doublestrandeddaughter DNA.Matthew Meselson (1930–) and Franklin Stahl (1929–) devised an experiment in 1958 to test which of thesemodels correctly represents DNA replication (Figure 11.5). They grew E. coli for several generations in a mediumcontaining a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (15N) that was incorporated into nitrogenous bases and, eventually, intothe DNA. This labeled the parental DNA. The E. coli culture was then shifted into a medium containing 14N andallowed to grow for one generation. The cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated. The DNA was separatedby ultracentrifugation, during which the DNA formed bands according to its density. DNA grown in 15N would beexpected to form a band at a higher density position than that grown in 14N. Meselson and Stahl noted that afterone generation of growth in 14N, the single band observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cellsgrown exclusively in 15N or 14N. This suggested either a semiconservative or dispersive mode of replication. Somecells were allowed to grow for one more generation in 14N and spun again. The DNA harvested from cells grownfor two generations in 14N formed two bands: one DNA band was at the intermediate position between 15N and 14N,and the other corresponded to the band of 14N DNA. These results could only be explained if DNA replicates in asemiconservative manner. Therefore, the other two models were ruled out. As a result of this experiment, we nowknow that during DNA replication, each of the two strands that make up the double helix serves as a template fromwhich new strands are copied. The new strand will be complementary to the parental or “old” strand. The resultingDNA molecules have the same sequence and are divided equally into the two daughter cells.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 449Figure 11.5 Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (15N) then in 14N. DNAgrown in 15N (blue band) was heavier than DNA grown in 14N (red band), and sedimented to a lower level onultracentrifugation. After one round of replication, the DNA sedimented halfway between the 15N and 14N levels(purple band), ruling out the conservative model of replication. After a second round of replication, the dispersivemodel of replication was ruled out. These data supported the semiconservative replication model.• What would have been the conclusion of Meselson and Stahl’s experiment if, after the first generation, theyhad found two bands of DNA?DNA Replication in BacteriaDNA replication has been well studied in bacteria primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutantsthat are available. E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs (Mbp) in a single circular chromosome and all of it is replicated inapproximately 42 minutes, starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding around the circle bidirectionally(i.e., in both directions). This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per second. The process is quiterapid and occurs with few errors.DNA replication uses a large number of proteins and enzymes (Table 11.1). One of the key players is the enzymeDNA polymerase, also known as DNA pol. In bacteria, three main types of DNA polymerases are known: DNA polI, DNA pol II, and DNA pol III. It is now known that DNA pol III is the enzyme required for DNA synthesis; DNApol I and DNA pol II are primarily required for repair. DNA pol III adds deoxyribonucleotides each complementary toa nucleotide on the template strand, one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing DNA chain. The addition of these450 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5nucleotides requires energy. This energy is present in the bonds of three phosphate groups attached to each nucleotide(a triphosphate nucleotide), similar to how energy is stored in the phosphate bonds of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)(Figure 11.6). When the bond between the phosphates is broken and diphosphate is released, the energy releasedallows for the formation of a covalent phosphodiester bond by dehydration synthesis between the incoming nucleotideand the free 3’-OH group on the growing DNA strand.Figure 11.6 This structure shows the guanosine triphosphate deoxyribonucleotide that is incorporated into agrowing DNA strand by cleaving the two end phosphate groups from the molecule and transferring the energy to thesugar phosphate bond. The other three nucleotides form analogous structures.InitiationThe initiation of replication occurs at specific nucleotide sequence called the origin of replication, where variousproteins bind to begin the replication process. E. coli has a single origin of replication (as do most prokaryotes), calledoriC, on its one chromosome. The origin of replication is approximately 245 base pairs long and is rich in adeninethymine(AT) sequences.Some of the proteins that bind to the origin of replication are important in making single-stranded regions of DNAaccessible for replication. Chromosomal DNA is typically wrapped around histones (in eukaryotes and archaea) orhistone-like proteins (in bacteria), and is supercoiled, or extensively wrapped and twisted on itself. This packagingmakes the information in the DNA molecule inaccessible. However, enzymes called topoisomerases change theshape and supercoiling of the chromosome. For bacterial DNA replication to begin, the supercoiled chromosome isrelaxed by topoisomerase II, also called DNA gyrase. An enzyme called helicase then separates the DNA strandsby breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs. Recall that AT sequences have fewer hydrogenbonds and, hence, have weaker interactions than guanine-cytosine (GC) sequences. These enzymes require ATPhydrolysis. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed. Two replication forksare formed at the origin of replication, allowing for bidirectional replication and formation of a structure that lookslike a bubble when viewed with a transmission electron microscope; as a result, this structure is called a replicationbubble. The DNA near each replication fork is coated with single-stranded binding proteins to prevent the singlestrandedDNA from rewinding into a double helix.Once single-stranded DNA is accessible at the origin of replication, DNA replication can begin. However, DNApol III is able to add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction (a new DNA strand can be only extended in thisdirection). This is because DNA polymerase requires a free 3’-OH group to which it can add nucleotides by forminga covalent phosphodiester bond between the 3’-OH end and the 5’ phosphate of the next nucleotide. This also meansthat it cannot add nucleotides if a free 3’-OH group is not available, which is the case for a single strand of DNA.The problem is solved with the help of an RNA sequence that provides the free 3’-OH end. Because this sequenceallows the start of DNA synthesis, it is appropriately called the primer. The primer is five to 10 nucleotides long andcomplementary to the parental or template DNA. It is synthesized by RNA primase, which is an RNA polymerase.Unlike DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases do not need a free 3’-OH group to synthesize an RNA molecule. Nowthat the primer provides the free 3’-OH group, DNA polymerase III can now extend this RNA primer, adding DNAnucleotides one by one that are complementary to the template strand (Figure 11.4).ElongationDuring elongation in DNA replication, the addition of nucleotides occurs at its maximal rate of about 1000nucleotides per second. DNA polymerase III can only extend in the 5’ to 3’ direction, which poses a problem atChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 451the replication fork. The DNA double helix is antiparallel; that is, one strand is oriented in the 5’ to 3’ directionand the other is oriented in the 3’ to 5’ direction (see Structure and Function of DNA). During replication,one strand, which is complementary to the 3’ to 5’ parental DNA strand, is synthesized continuously toward thereplication fork because polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction. This continuously synthesized strand isknown as the leading strand. The other strand, complementary to the 5’ to 3’ parental DNA, grows away fromthe replication fork, so the polymerase must move back toward the replication fork to begin adding bases to a newprimer, again in the direction away from the replication fork. It does so until it bumps into the previously synthesizedstrand and then it moves back again (Figure 11.7). These steps produce small DNA sequence fragments knownas Okazaki fragments, each separated by RNA primer. Okazaki fragments are named after the Japanese researchteam and married couple Reiji and Tsuneko Okazaki, who first discovered them in 1966. The strand with the Okazakifragments is known as the lagging strand, and its synthesis is said to be discontinuous.The leading strand can be extended from one primer alone, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each ofthe short Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3’ to 5’, and that of the leading strand5’ to 3’. A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to add nucleotides.The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place. Beyond its rolein initiation, topoisomerase also prevents the overwinding of the DNA double helix ahead of the replication fork asthe DNA is opening up; it does so by causing temporary nicks in the DNA helix and then resealing it. As synthesisproceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA. The primers are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNApolymerase I, and the gaps are filled in. The nicks that remain between the newly synthesized DNA (that replaced theRNA primer) and the previously synthesized DNA are sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase that catalyzes the formationof covalent phosphodiester linkage between the 3’-OH end of one DNA fragment and the 5’ phosphate end of theother fragment, stabilizing the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA molecule.452 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.7 At the origin of replication, topoisomerase II relaxes the supercoiled chromosome. Two replication forksare formed by the opening of the double-stranded DNA at the origin, and helicase separates the DNA strands, whichare coated by single-stranded binding proteins to keep the strands separated. DNA replication occurs in bothdirections. An RNA primer complementary to the parental strand is synthesized by RNA primase and is elongated byDNA polymerase III through the addition of nucleotides to the 3’-OH end. On the leading strand, DNA is synthesizedcontinuously, whereas on the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches called Okazaki fragments. RNAprimers within the lagging strand are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I, and the Okazakifragments are joined by DNA ligase.TerminationOnce the complete chromosome has been replicated, termination of DNA replication must occur. Although muchis known about initiation of replication, less is known about the termination process. Following replication, theresulting complete circular genomes of prokaryotes are concatenated, meaning that the circular DNA chromosomesare interlocked and must be separated from each other. This is accomplished through the activity of bacterialtopoisomerase IV, which introduces double-stranded breaks into DNA molecules, allowing them to separate fromeach other; the enzyme then reseals the circular chromosomes. The resolution of concatemers is an issue uniqueto prokaryotic DNA replication because of their circular chromosomes. Because both bacterial DNA gyrase andtopoisomerase IV are distinct from their eukaryotic counterparts, these enzymes serve as targets for a class ofantimicrobial drugs called quinolones.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 453The Molecular Machinery Involved in Bacterial DNA ReplicationEnzyme orFactorFunctionDNA pol I Exonuclease activity removes RNA primer and replaces it with newly synthesized DNADNA pol III Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5’ to 3’ directionHelicase Opens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous basesLigase Seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand to create onecontinuous DNA strandPrimase Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replicationSinglestrandedbindingproteinsBind to single-stranded DNA to prevent hydrogen bonding between DNA strands, reformingdouble-stranded DNASliding clamp Helps hold DNA pol III in place when nucleotides are being addedTopoisomeraseII (DNAgyrase)Relaxes supercoiled chromosome to make DNA more accessible for the initiation ofreplication; helps relieve the stress on DNA when unwinding, by causing breaks and thenresealing the DNATopoisomeraseIVIntroduces single-stranded break into concatenated chromosomes to release them from eachother, and then reseals the DNATable 11.1• Which enzyme breaks the hydrogen bonds holding the two strands of DNA together so that replication canoccur?• Is it the lagging strand or the leading strand that is synthesized in the direction toward the opening of thereplication fork?• Which enzyme is responsible for removing the RNA primers in newly replicated bacterial DNA?DNA Replication in EukaryotesEukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger than prokaryotic genomes and are typically composed ofmultiple linear chromosomes (Table 11.2). The human genome, for example, has 3 billion base pairs per haploid setof chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are inserted during replication. There are multiple origins of replication oneach eukaryotic chromosome (Figure 11.8); the human genome has 30,000 to 50,000 origins of replication. The rateof replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second—10 times slower than prokaryotic replication.454 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.8 Eukaryotic chromosomes are typically linear, and each contains multiple origins of replication.The essential steps of replication in eukaryotes are the same as in prokaryotes. Before replication can start, the DNAhas to be made available as a template. Eukaryotic DNA is highly supercoiled and packaged, which is facilitatedby many proteins, including histones (see Structure and Function of Cellular Genomes). At the origin ofreplication, a prereplication complex composed of several proteins, including helicase, forms and recruits otherenzymes involved in the initiation of replication, including topoisomerase to relax supercoiling, single-strandedbinding protein, RNA primase, and DNA polymerase. Following initiation of replication, in a process similar to thatfound in prokaryotes, elongation is facilitated by eukaryotic DNA polymerases. The leading strand is continuouslysynthesized by the eukaryotic polymerase enzyme pol δ, while the lagging strand is synthesized by pol ε. A slidingclamp protein holds the DNA polymerase in place so that it does not fall off the DNA. The enzyme ribonuclease H(RNase H), instead of a DNA polymerase as in bacteria, removes the RNA primer, which is then replaced with DNAnucleotides. The gaps that remain are sealed by DNA ligase.Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, one might expect that their replication would be more straightforward.As in prokaryotes, the eukaryotic DNA polymerase can add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction. In the leadingstrand, synthesis continues until it reaches either the end of the chromosome or another replication fork progressingin the opposite direction. On the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated bya separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no place to make aprimer for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the chromosome. These ends thus remain unpaired and, overtime, they may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres and consist of noncoding repetitive sequences. Thetelomeres protect coding sequences from being lost as cells continue to divide. In humans, a six base-pair sequence,TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times to form the telomere. The discovery of the enzyme telomerase (Figure11.9) clarified our understanding of how chromosome ends are maintained. Telomerase contains a catalytic part anda built-in RNA template. It attaches to the end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA templateare added on the 3’ end of the DNA strand. Once the 3’ end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated,DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. In this way, the ends ofthe chromosomes are replicated. In humans, telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells; it is notactive in adult somatic cells and may be associated with the aging of these cells. Eukaryotic microbes including fungiand protozoans also produce telomerase to maintain chromosomal integrity. For her discovery of telomerase and itsaction, Elizabeth Blackburn (1948–) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology in 2009.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 455Figure 11.9 In eukaryotes, the ends of the linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomeraseenzyme.Comparison of Bacterial and Eukaryotic ReplicationProperty Bacteria EukaryotesGenome structure Single circular chromosome Multiple linear chromosomesNumber of origins per chromosome Single MultipleRate of replication 1000 nucleotides per second 100 nucleotides per secondTelomerase Not present PresentRNA primer removal DNA pol I RNase HStrand elongation DNA pol III pol δ, pol εTable 11.2456 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5This animation (https://openstax.org/l/22DNAreplicani) illustrates the processof DNA replication.• How does the origin of replication differ between eukaryotes and prokaryotes?• What polymerase enzymes are responsible for DNA synthesis during eukaryotic replication?• What is found at the ends of the chromosomes in eukaryotes and why?DNA Replication of Extrachromosomal Elements: Plasmids and VirusesTo copy their nucleic acids, plasmids and viruses frequently use variations on the pattern of DNA replicationdescribed for prokaryote genomes. For more information on the wide range of viral replication strategies, see TheViral Life Cycle.Rolling Circle ReplicationWhereas many bacterial plasmids (see Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells) replicate by a processsimilar to that used to copy the bacterial chromosome, other plasmids, several bacteriophages, and some viruses ofeukaryotes use rolling circle replication (Figure 11.10). The circular nature of plasmids and the circularizationof some viral genomes on infection make this possible. Rolling circle replication begins with the enzymatic nickingof one strand of the double-stranded circular molecule at the double-stranded origin (dso) site. In bacteria, DNApolymerase III binds to the 3’-OH group of the nicked strand and begins to unidirectionally replicate the DNA usingthe un-nicked strand as a template, displacing the nicked strand as it does so. Completion of DNA replication at thesite of the original nick results in full displacement of the nicked strand, which may then recircularize into a singlestrandedDNA molecule. RNA primase then synthesizes a primer to initiate DNA replication at the single-strandedorigin (sso) site of the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecule, resulting in a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)molecule identical to the other circular DNA molecule.Link to LearningChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 457Figure 11.10 The process of rolling circle replication results in the synthesis of a single new copy of the circularDNA molecule, as shown here.• Is there a lagging strand in rolling circle replication? Why or why not?11.3 RNA TranscriptionLearning Objectives• Explain how RNA is synthesized using DNA as a template• Distinguish between transcription in prokaryotes and eukaryotesDuring the process of transcription, the information encoded within the DNA sequence of one or more genes istranscribed into a strand of RNA, also called an RNA transcript. The resulting single-stranded RNA molecule,composed of ribonucleotides containing the bases adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and uracil (U), acts as amobile molecular copy of the original DNA sequence. Transcription in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes requires theDNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of RNA synthesis. The unwound region is called a transcriptionbubble. Transcription of a particular gene always proceeds from one of the two DNA strands that acts as a template,the so-called antisense strand. The RNA product is complementary to the template strand of DNA and is almostidentical to the nontemplate DNA strand, or the sense strand. The only difference is that in RNA, all of the Tnucleotides are replaced with U nucleotides; during RNA synthesis, U is incorporated when there is an A in thecomplementary antisense strand.Transcription in BacteriaBacteria use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. Like DNA polymerase, RNA polymeraseadds nucleotides one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing nucleotide chain. One critical difference in activitybetween DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase is the requirement for a 3’-OH onto which to add nucleotides: DNApolymerase requires such a 3’-OH group, thus necessitating a primer, whereas RNA polymerase does not. During458 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5transcription, a ribonucleotide complementary to the DNA template strand is added to the growing RNA strand and acovalent phosphodiester bond is formed by dehydration synthesis between the new nucleotide and the last one added.In E. coli, RNA polymerase comprises six polypeptide subunits, five of which compose the polymerase core enzymeresponsible for adding RNA nucleotides to a growing strand. The sixth subunit is known as sigma (σ). The σ factorenables RNA polymerase to bind to a specific promoter, thus allowing for the transcription of various genes. Thereare various σ factors that allow for transcription of various genes.InitiationThe initiation of transcription begins at a promoter, a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery bindsand initiates transcription. The nucleotide pair in the DNA double helix that corresponds to the site from which thefirst 5’ RNA nucleotide is transcribed is the initiation site. Nucleotides preceding the initiation site are designated“upstream,” whereas nucleotides following the initiation site are called “downstream” nucleotides. In most cases,promoters are located just upstream of the genes they regulate. Although promoter sequences vary among bacterialgenomes, a few elements are conserved. At the –10 and –35 positions within the DNA prior to the initiation site(designated +1), there are two promoter consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters andacross various bacterial species. The –10 consensus sequence, called the TATA box, is TATAAT. The –35 sequence isrecognized and bound by σ.ElongationThe elongation in transcription phase begins when the σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase, allowing the coreenzyme to synthesize RNA complementary to the DNA template in a 5’ to 3’ direction at a rate of approximately 40nucleotides per second. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme andrewound behind it (Figure 11.11).Figure 11.11 During elongation, the bacterial RNA polymerase tracks along the DNA template, synthesizes mRNAin the 5’ to 3’ direction, and unwinds and rewinds the DNA as it is read.TerminationOnce a gene is transcribed, the bacterial polymerase must dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newlymade RNA. This is referred to as termination of transcription. The DNA template includes repeated nucleotidesequences that act as termination signals, causing RNA polymerase to stall and release from the DNA template,freeing the RNA transcript.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 459• Where does σ factor of RNA polymerase bind DNA to start transcription?• What occurs to initiate the polymerization activity of RNA polymerase?• Where does the signal to end transcription come from?Transcription in EukaryotesProkaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few significantdifferences (see Table 11.3). Eukaryotes use three different polymerases, RNA polymerases I, II, and III, allstructurally distinct from the bacterial RNA polymerase. Each transcribes a different subset of genes. Interestingly,archaea contain a single RNA polymerase that is more closely related to eukaryotic RNA polymerase II than to itsbacterial counterpart. Eukaryotic mRNAs are also usually monocistronic, meaning that they each encode only a singlepolypeptide, whereas prokaryotic mRNAs of bacteria and archaea are commonly polycistronic, meaning that theyencode multiple polypeptides.The most important difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is the latter’s membrane-bound nucleus, whichinfluences the ease of use of RNA molecules for protein synthesis. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the eukaryoticcell must transport protein-encoding RNA molecules to the cytoplasm to be translated. Protein-encoding primarytranscripts, the RNA molecules directly synthesized by RNA polymerase, must undergo several processing stepsto protect these RNA molecules from degradation during the time they are transferred from the nucleus to thecytoplasm and translated into a protein. For example, eukaryotic mRNAs may last for several hours, whereas thetypical prokaryotic mRNA lasts no more than 5 seconds.The primary transcript (also called pre-mRNA) is first coated with RNA-stabilizing proteins to protect it fromdegradation while it is processed and exported out of the nucleus. The first type of processing begins while theprimary transcript is still being synthesized; a special 7-methylguanosine nucleotide, called the 5’ cap, is added tothe 5’ end of the growing transcript. In addition to preventing degradation, factors involved in subsequent proteinsynthesis recognize the cap, which helps initiate translation by ribosomes. Once elongation is complete, anotherprocessing enzyme then adds a string of approximately 200 adenine nucleotides to the 3’ end, called the poly-A tail.This modification further protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and signals to cellular factors that the transcriptneeds to be exported to the cytoplasm.Eukaryotic genes that encode polypeptides are composed of coding sequences called exons (ex-on signifies that theyare expressed) and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role). Transcribed RNAsequences corresponding to introns do not encode regions of the functional polypeptide and are removed from the premRNAduring processing. It is essential that all of the intron-encoded RNA sequences are completely and preciselyremoved from a pre-mRNA before protein synthesis so that the exon-encoded RNA sequences are properly joinedtogether to code for a functional polypeptide. If the process errs by even a single nucleotide, the sequences of therejoined exons would be shifted, and the resulting polypeptide would be nonfunctional. The process of removingintron-encoded RNA sequences and reconnecting those encoded by exons is called RNA splicing and is facilitated bythe action of a spliceosome containing small nuclear ribonucleo proteins (snRNPs). Intron-encoded RNA sequencesare removed from the pre-mRNA while it is still in the nucleus. Although they are not translated, introns appear tohave various functions, including gene regulation and mRNA transport. On completion of these modifications, themature transcript, the mRNA that encodes a polypeptide, is transported out of the nucleus, destined for the cytoplasmfor translation. Introns can be spliced out differently, resulting in various exons being included or excluded fromthe final mRNA product. This process is known as alternative splicing. The advantage of alternative splicing is thatdifferent types of mRNA transcripts can be generated, all derived from the same DNA sequence. In recent years, ithas been shown that some archaea also have the ability to splice their pre-mRNA.460 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Comparison of Transcription in Bacteria Versus EukaryotesProperty Bacteria EukaryotesNumber of polypeptides encoded per mRNA Monocistronic or polycistronic Exclusively monocistronicStrand elongation core + σ = holoenzyme RNA polymerases I, II, or IIIAddition of 5’ cap No YesAddition of 3’ poly-A tail No YesSplicing of pre-mRNA No YesTable 11.3Visualize how mRNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22mrnasplice) happensby watching the process in action in this video. See how introns are removedduring RNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22rnasplice) here.• In eukaryotic cells, how is the RNA transcript from a gene for a protein modified after it is transcribed?• Do exons or introns contain information for protein sequences?Part 2In the emergency department, a nurse told Mark that he had made a good decision to come to the hospitalbecause his symptoms indicated an infection that had gotten out of control. Mark’s symptoms had progressed,with the area of skin affected and the amount of swelling increasing. Within the affected area, a rash hadbegun, blistering and small gas pockets underneath the outermost layer of skin had formed, and some of theskin was becoming gray. Based on the putrid smell of the pus draining from one of the blisters, the rapidprogression of the infection, and the visual appearance of the affected skin, the physician immediately begantreatment for necrotizing fasciitis. Mark’s physician ordered a culture of the fluid draining from the blister andalso ordered blood work, including a white blood cell count.Mark was admitted to the intensive care unit and began intravenous administration of a broad-spectrumantibiotic to try to minimize further spread of the infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, Mark’s conditiondeteriorated quickly. Mark became confused and dizzy. Within a few hours of his hospital admission, hisblood pressure dropped significantly and his breathing became shallower and more rapid. Additionally,blistering increased, with the blisters intensifying in color to purplish black, and the wound itself seemed to beprogressing rapidly up Mark’s leg.• What are possible causative agents of Mark’s necrotizing fasciitis?Link to LearningClinical FocusChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 461• What are some possible explanations for why the antibiotic treatment does not seem to be working?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)Learning Objectives• Describe the genetic code and explain why it is considered almost universal• Explain the process of translation and the functions of the molecular machinery of translation• Compare translation in eukaryotes and prokaryotesThe synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s energy than any other metabolic process. In turn, proteins accountfor more mass than any other macromolecule of living organisms. They perform virtually every function of a cell,serving as both functional (e.g., enzymes) and structural elements. The process of translation, or protein synthesis,the second part of gene expression, involves the decoding by a ribosome of an mRNA message into a polypeptideproduct.The Genetic CodeTranslation of the mRNA template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into the “language” of amino acidsto create a protein product. A protein sequence consists of 20 commonly occurring amino acids. Each amino acid isdefined within the mRNA by a triplet of nucleotides called a codon. The relationship between an mRNA codon andits corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code.The three-nucleotide code means that there is a total of 64 possible combinations (43, with four different nucleotidespossible at each of the three different positions within the codon). This number is greater than the number of aminoacids and a given amino acid is encoded by more than one codon (Figure 11.12). This redundancy in the geneticcode is called degeneracy. Typically, whereas the first two positions in a codon are important for determining whichamino acid will be incorporated into a growing polypeptide, the third position, called the wobble position, is lesscritical. In some cases, if the nucleotide in the third position is changed, the same amino acid is still incorporated.Whereas 61 of the 64 possible triplets code for amino acids, three of the 64 codons do not code for an amino acid; theyterminate protein synthesis, releasing the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These are called stop codonsor nonsense codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying the amino acidmethionine, it also typically serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame, the way nucleotidesin mRNA are grouped into codons, for translation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5’ end of the mRNA. Eachset of three nucleotides following this start codon is a codon in the mRNA message.The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code forprotein synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all extant life on earth shares a common origin. However, unusualamino acids such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine have been observed in archaea and bacteria. In the case ofselenocysteine, the codon used is UGA (normally a stop codon). However, UGA can encode for selenocysteine usinga stem-loop structure (known as the selenocysteine insertion sequence, or SECIS element), which is found at the 3’untranslated region of the mRNA. Pyrrolysine uses a different stop codon, UAG. The incorporation of pyrrolysinerequires the pylS gene and a unique transfer RNA (tRNA) with a CUA anticodon.462 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.12 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acidor a termination signal in a nascent protein. The first letter of a codon is shown vertically on the left, the second letterof a codon is shown horizontally across the top, and the third letter of a codon is shown vertically on the right. (credit:modification of work by National Institutes of Health)• How many bases are in each codon?• What amino acid is coded for by the codon AAU?• What happens when a stop codon is reached?The Protein Synthesis MachineryIn addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation.The composition of each component varies across taxa; for instance, ribosomes may consist of different numbersof ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures andfunctions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires theinput of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors.RibosomesA ribosome is a complex macromolecule composed of catalytic rRNAs (called ribozymes) and structural rRNAs, aswell as many distinct polypeptides. Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50% of each ribosome. Prokaryotes have70S ribosomes, whereas eukaryotes have 80S ribosomes in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum, and 70Sribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are notsynthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation. In E. coli, the small subunit is describedas 30S (which contains the 16S rRNA subunit), and the large subunit is 50S (which contains the 5S and 23S rRNAsubunits), for a total of 70S (Svedberg units are not additive). Eukaryote ribosomes have a small 40S subunit (whichcontains the 18S rRNA subunit) and a large 60S subunit (which contains the 5S, 5.8S and 28S rRNA subunits), for atotal of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit binds tRNAsChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 463(discussed in the next subsection).Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction:reading the mRNA from 5’ to 3’ and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. Thecomplete structure containing an mRNA with multiple associated ribosomes is called a polyribosome (or polysome).In both bacteria and archaea, before transcriptional termination occurs, each protein-encoding transcript is alreadybeing used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded polypeptide(s) because the processes of transcriptionand translation can occur concurrently, forming polyribosomes (Figure 11.13). The reason why transcription andtranslation can occur simultaneously is because both of these processes occur in the same 5’ to 3’ direction, they bothoccur in the cytoplasm of the cell, and because the RNA transcript is not processed once it is transcribed. This allowsa prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal requiring new proteins very quickly. In contrast, in eukaryoticcells, simultaneous transcription and translation is not possible. Although polyribosomes also form in eukaryotes,they cannot do so until RNA synthesis is complete and the RNA molecule has been modified and transported out ofthe nucleus.Figure 11.13 In prokaryotes, multiple RNA polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerousribosomes concurrently translate the mRNA transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific protein can rapidlyreach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.Transfer RNAsTransfer RNAs (tRNAs) are structural RNA molecules and, depending on the species, many different types of tRNAsexist in the cytoplasm. Bacterial species typically have between 60 and 90 types. Serving as adaptors, each tRNA typebinds to a specific codon on the mRNA template and adds the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain.Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins. Asthe adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small package.The tRNA molecule interacts with three factors: aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, ribosomes, and mRNA.Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure when complementary bases exposed in the single-stranded RNAmolecule hydrogen bond with each other (Figure 11.14). This shape positions the amino-acid binding site, calledthe CCA amino acid binding end, which is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3’ end of the tRNA, and theanticodon at the other end. The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence that bonds with an mRNA codon throughcomplementary base pairing.An amino acid is added to the end of a tRNA molecule through the process of tRNA “charging,” during whicheach tRNA molecule is linked to its correct or cognate amino acid by a group of enzymes called aminoacyl tRNAsynthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids. During thisprocess, the amino acid is first activated by the addition of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and then transferred tothe tRNA, making it a charged tRNA, and AMP is released.464 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.14 (a) After folding caused by intramolecular base pairing, a tRNA molecule has one end that containsthe anticodon, which interacts with the mRNA codon, and the CCA amino acid binding end. (b) A space-filling modelis helpful for visualizing the three-dimensional shape of tRNA. (c) Simplified models are useful when drawing complexprocesses such as protein synthesis.• Describe the structure and composition of the prokaryotic ribosome.• In what direction is the mRNA template read?• Describe the structure and function of a tRNA.The Mechanism of Protein SynthesisTranslation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we will explore how translation occurs in E. coli, arepresentative prokaryote, and specify any differences between bacterial and eukaryotic translation.InitiationThe initiation of protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complexinvolves the small 30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors that help the ribosome assemblecorrectly, guanosine triphosphate (GTP) that acts as an energy source, and a special initiator tRNA carrying N-formylmethionine(fMet-tRNAfMet) (Figure 11.15). The initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG of the mRNAand carries a formylated methionine (fMet). Because of its involvement in initiation, fMet is inserted at the beginning(N terminus) of every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli. In E. coli mRNA, a leader sequence upstream of thefirst AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (also known as the ribosomal binding site AGGAGG), interactsthrough complementary base pairing with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interaction anchorsthe 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. At this point, the 50S ribosomal subunitthen binds to the initiation complex, forming an intact ribosome.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 465In eukaryotes, initiation complex formation is similar, with the following differences:• The initiator tRNA is a different specialized tRNA carrying methionine, called Met-tRNAi• Instead of binding to the mRNA at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizesthe 5’ cap of the eukaryotic mRNA, then tracks along the mRNA in the 5’ to 3’ direction until the AUG startcodon is recognized. At this point, the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40Ssubunit.Figure 11.15 Translation in bacteria begins with the formation of the initiation complex, which includes the smallribosomal subunit, the mRNA, the initiator tRNA carrying N-formyl-methionine, and initiation factors. Then the 50Ssubunit binds, forming an intact ribosome.ElongationIn prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation of translation are the same. In E. coli, the binding of the50S ribosomal subunit to produce the intact ribosome forms three functionally important ribosomal sites: The A(aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carryingamino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated fromtheir corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free aminoacids. There is one notable exception to this assembly line of tRNAs: During initiation complex formation, bacterialfMet−tRNAfMet or eukaryotic Met-tRNAi enters the P site directly without first entering the A site, providing a freeA site ready to accept the tRNA corresponding to the first codon after the AUG.Elongation proceeds with single-codon movements of the ribosome each called a translocation event. During eachtranslocation event, the charged tRNAs enter at the A site, then shift to the P site, and then finally to the E site forremoval. Ribosomal movements, or steps, are induced by conformational changes that advance the ribosome by three466 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5bases in the 3’ direction. Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNAand the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond is catalyzedby peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based ribozyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The amino acidbound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the growing polypeptide chain. As the ribosome steps across the mRNA,the former P-site tRNA enters the E site, detaches from the amino acid, and is expelled. Several of the steps duringelongation, including binding of a charged aminoacyl tRNA to the A site and translocation, require energy derivedfrom GTP hydrolysis, which is catalyzed by specific elongation factors. Amazingly, the E. coli translation apparatustakes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200 amino-acid protein can be translated in just 10seconds.TerminationThe termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered for whichthere is no complementary tRNA. On aligning with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by releasefactors in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that result in the P-site amino acid detaching from its tRNA, releasing the newlymade polypeptide. The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they arerecruited almost immediately into another translation initiation complex.In summary, there are several key features that distinguish prokaryotic gene expression from that seen in eukaryotes.These are illustrated in Figure 11.16 and listed in Figure 11.17.Figure 11.16 (a) In prokaryotes, the processes of transcription and translation occur simultaneously in thecytoplasm, allowing for a rapid cellular response to an environmental cue. (b) In eukaryotes, transcription is localizedto the nucleus and translation is localized to the cytoplasm, separating these processes and necessitating RNAprocessing for stability.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 467Figure 11.17Protein Targeting, Folding, and ModificationDuring and after translation, polypeptides may need to be modified before they are biologically active. Posttranslationalmodifications include:1. removal of translated signal sequences—short tails of amino acids that aid in directing a protein to a specificcellular compartment2. proper “folding” of the polypeptide and association of multiple polypeptide subunits, often facilitated bychaperone proteins, into a distinct three-dimensional structure3. proteolytic processing of an inactive polypeptide to release an active protein component, and4. various chemical modifications (e.g., phosphorylation, methylation, or glycosylation) of individual aminoacids.• What are the components of the initiation complex for translation in prokaryotes?• What are two differences between initiation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation?• What occurs at each of the three active sites of the ribosome?• What causes termination of translation?468 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.511.5 MutationsLearning Objectives• Compare point mutations and frameshift mutations• Describe the differences between missense, nonsense, and silent mutations• Describe the differences between light and dark repair• Explain how different mutagens act• Explain why the Ames test can be used to detect carcinogens• Analyze sequences of DNA and identify examples of types of mutationsA mutation is a heritable change in the DNA sequence of an organism. The resulting organism, called a mutant,may have a recognizable change in phenotype compared to the wild type, which is the phenotype most commonlyobserved in nature. A change in the DNA sequence is conferred to mRNA through transcription, and may lead toan altered amino acid sequence in a protein on translation. Because proteins carry out the vast majority of cellularfunctions, a change in amino acid sequence in a protein may lead to an altered phenotype for the cell and organism.Effects of Mutations on DNA SequenceThere are several types of mutations that are classified according to how the DNA molecule is altered. One type,called a point mutation, affects a single base and most commonly occurs when one base is substituted or replaced byanother. Mutations also result from the addition of one or more bases, known as an insertion, or the removal of oneor more bases, known as a deletion.• What type of a mutation occurs when a gene has two fewer nucleotides in its sequence?Effects of Mutations on Protein Structure and FunctionPoint mutations may have a wide range of effects on protein function (Figure 11.18). As a consequence of thedegeneracy of the genetic code, a point mutation will commonly result in the same amino acid being incorporated intothe resulting polypeptide despite the sequence change. This change would have no effect on the protein’s structure,and is thus called a silent mutation. A missense mutation results in a different amino acid being incorporated intothe resulting polypeptide. The effect of a missense mutation depends on how chemically different the new amino acidis from the wild-type amino acid. The location of the changed amino acid within the protein also is important. Forexample, if the changed amino acid is part of the enzyme’s active site, then the effect of the missense mutation may besignificant. Many missense mutations result in proteins that are still functional, at least to some degree. Sometimes theeffects of missense mutations may be only apparent under certain environmental conditions; such missense mutationsare called conditional mutations. Rarely, a missense mutation may be beneficial. Under the right environmentalconditions, this type of mutation may give the organism that harbors it a selective advantage. Yet another type ofpoint mutation, called a nonsense mutation, converts a codon encoding an amino acid (a sense codon) into a stopcodon (a nonsense codon). Nonsense mutations result in the synthesis of proteins that are shorter than the wild typeand typically not functional.Deletions and insertions also cause various effects. Because codons are triplets of nucleotides, insertions or deletionsin groups of three nucleotides may lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more amino acids and may not causesignificant effects on the resulting protein’s functionality. However, frameshift mutations, caused by insertions ordeletions of a number of nucleotides that are not a multiple of three are extremely problematic because a shift in theChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 469reading frame results (Figure 11.18). Because ribosomes read the mRNA in triplet codons, frameshift mutations canchange every amino acid after the point of the mutation. The new reading frame may also include a stop codon beforethe end of the coding sequence. Consequently, proteins made from genes containing frameshift mutations are nearlyalways nonfunctional.Figure 11.18 Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.• What are the reasons a nucleotide change in a gene for a protein might not have any effect on the phenotypeof that gene?• Is it possible for an insertion of three nucleotides together after the fifth nucleotide in a protein-coding geneto produce a protein that is shorter than normal? How or how not?470 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5A Beneficial MutationSince the first case of infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was reported in 1981, nearly 40million people have died from HIV infection,[2] the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome(AIDS). The virus targets helper T cells that play a key role in bridging the innate and adaptive immuneresponse, infecting and killing cells normally involved in the body’s response to infection. There is no cure forHIV infection, but many drugs have been developed to slow or block the progression of the virus. Althoughindividuals around the world may be infected, the highest prevalence among people 15–49 years old is in sub-Saharan Africa, where nearly one person in 20 is infected, accounting for greater than 70% of the infectionsworldwide[3] (Figure 11.19). Unfortunately, this is also a part of the world where prevention strategies anddrugs to treat the infection are the most lacking.In recent years, scientific interest has been piqued by the discovery of a few individuals from northern Europewho are resistant to HIV infection. In 1998, American geneticist Stephen J. O’Brien at the National Institutesof Health (NIH) and colleagues published the results of their genetic analysis of more than 4,000 individuals.These indicated that many individuals of Eurasian descent (up to 14% in some ethnic groups) have a deletionmutation, called CCR5-delta 32, in the gene encoding CCR5. CCR5 is a coreceptor found on the surface of Tcells that is necessary for many strains of the virus to enter the host cell. The mutation leads to the productionof a receptor to which HIV cannot effectively bind and thus blocks viral entry. People homozygous for thismutation have greatly reduced susceptibility to HIV infection, and those who are heterozygous have someprotection from infection as well.It is not clear why people of northern European descent, specifically, carry this mutation, but its prevalenceseems to be highest in northern Europe and steadily decreases in populations as one moves south. Researchindicates that the mutation has been present since before HIV appeared and may have been selected for inEuropean populations as a result of exposure to the plague or smallpox. This mutation may protect individualsfrom plague (caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis) and smallpox (caused by the variola virus) because thisreceptor may also be involved in these diseases. The age of this mutation is a matter of debate, but estimatessuggest it appeared between 1875 years to 225 years ago, and may have been spread from Northern Europethrough Viking invasions.This exciting finding has led to new avenues in HIV research, including looking for drugs to block CCR5 bindingto HIV in individuals who lack the mutation. Although DNA testing to determine which individuals carry theCCR5-delta 32 mutation is possible, there are documented cases of individuals homozygous for the mutationcontracting HIV. For this reason, DNA testing for the mutation is not widely recommended by public healthofficials so as not to encourage risky behavior in those who carry the mutation. Nevertheless, inhibiting thebinding of HIV to CCR5 continues to be a valid strategy for the development of drug therapies for those infectedwith HIV.Micro Connections2. World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,2016.3. World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,2016.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 471Figure 11.19 HIV is highly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, but its prevalence is quite low in some otherparts of the world.Causes of MutationsMistakes in the process of DNA replication can cause spontaneous mutations to occur. The error rate of DNApolymerase is one incorrect base per billion base pairs replicated. Exposure to mutagens can cause inducedmutations, which are various types of chemical agents or radiation (Table 11.4). Exposure to a mutagen can increasethe rate of mutation more than 1000-fold. Mutagens are often also carcinogens, agents that cause cancer. However,whereas nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic, not all mutagens are necessarily carcinogens.Chemical MutagensVarious types of chemical mutagens interact directly with DNA either by acting as nucleoside analogs or bymodifying nucleotide bases. Chemicals called nucleoside analogs are structurally similar to normal nucleotide basesand can be incorporated into DNA during replication (Figure 11.20). These base analogs induce mutations becausethey often have different base-pairing rules than the bases they replace. Other chemical mutagens can modify normalDNA bases, resulting in different base-pairing rules. For example, nitrous acid deaminates cytosine, converting it touracil. Uracil then pairs with adenine in a subsequent round of replication, resulting in the conversion of a GC basepair to an AT base pair. Nitrous acid also deaminates adenine to hypoxanthine, which base pairs with cytosine insteadof thymine, resulting in the conversion of a TA base pair to a CG base pair.Chemical mutagens known as intercalating agents work differently. These molecules slide between the stackednitrogenous bases of the DNA double helix, distorting the molecule and creating atypical spacing between nucleotidebase pairs (Figure 11.21). As a result, during DNA replication, DNA polymerase may either skip replicating472 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5several nucleotides (creating a deletion) or insert extra nucleotides (creating an insertion). Either outcome may leadto a frameshift mutation. Combustion products like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are particularly dangerousintercalating agents that can lead to mutation-caused cancers. The intercalating agents ethidium bromide and acridineorange are commonly used in the laboratory to stain DNA for visualization and are potential mutagens.Figure 11.20 (a) 2-aminopurine nucleoside (2AP) structurally is a nucleoside analog to adenine nucleoside,whereas 5-bromouracil (5BU) is a nucleoside analog to thymine nucleoside. 2AP base pairs with C, converting an ATbase pair to a GC base pair after several rounds of replication. 5BU pairs with G, converting an AT base pair to a GCbase pair after several rounds of replication. (b) Nitrous acid is a different type of chemical mutagen that modifiesalready existing nucleoside bases like C to produce U, which base pairs with A. This chemical modification, as shownhere, results in converting a CG base pair to a TA base pair.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 473Figure 11.21 Intercalating agents, such as acridine, introduce atypical spacing between base pairs, resulting in DNApolymerase introducing either a deletion or an insertion, leading to a potential frameshift mutation.RadiationExposure to either ionizing or nonionizing radiation can each induce mutations in DNA, although by differentmechanisms. Strong ionizing radiation like X-rays and gamma rays can cause single- and double-stranded breaksin the DNA backbone through the formation of hydroxyl radicals on radiation exposure (Figure 11.22). Ionizingradiation can also modify bases; for example, the deamination of cytosine to uracil, analogous to the action ofnitrous acid.[4] Ionizing radiation exposure is used to kill microbes to sterilize medical devices and foods, becauseof its dramatic nonspecific effect in damaging DNA, proteins, and other cellular components (see Using PhysicalMethods to Control Microorganisms).Nonionizing radiation, like ultraviolet light, is not energetic enough to initiate these types of chemical changes.However, nonionizing radiation can induce dimer formation between two adjacent pyrimidine bases, commonly twothymines, within a nucleotide strand. During thymine dimer formation, the two adjacent thymines become covalentlylinked and, if left unrepaired, both DNA replication and transcription are stalled at this point. DNA polymerase mayproceed and replicate the dimer incorrectly, potentially leading to frameshift or point mutations.4. K.R. Tindall et al. “Changes in DNA Base Sequence Induced by Gamma-Ray Mutagenesis of Lambda Phage and Prophage.” Genetics118 no. 4 (1988):551–560.474 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.22 (a) Ionizing radiation may lead to the formation of single-stranded and double-stranded breaks in thesugar-phosphate backbone of DNA, as well as to the modification of bases (not shown). (b) Nonionizing radiation likeultraviolet light can lead to the formation of thymine dimers, which can stall replication and transcription and introduceframeshift or point mutations.A Summary of Mutagenic AgentsMutagenic Agents Mode of Action Effect on DNA Resulting Type ofMutationNucleoside analogs2-aminopurine Is inserted in place of A butbase pairs with CConverts AT to GCbase pairPoint5-bromouracil Is inserted in place of T butbase pairs with GConverts AT to GCbase pairPointNucleotide-modifying agentNitrous oxide Deaminates C to U Converts GC to ATbase pairPointIntercalating agentsAcridine orange, ethidiumbromide, polycyclic aromatichydrocarbonsDistorts double helix, createsunusual spacing betweennucleotidesIntroduces smalldeletions andinsertionsFrameshiftIonizing radiationX-rays, γ-rays Forms hydroxyl radicals Causes single- anddouble-strand DNAbreaksRepairmechanisms mayintroduce mutationsX-rays, γ-rays Modifies bases (e.g.,deaminating C to U)Converts GC to ATbase pairPointNonionizing radiationUltraviolet Forms pyrimidine (usuallythymine) dimersCauses DNAreplication errorsFrameshift or pointTable 11.4Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 475• How does a base analog introduce a mutation?• How does an intercalating agent introduce a mutation?• What type of mutagen causes thymine dimers?DNA RepairThe process of DNA replication is highly accurate, but mistakes can occur spontaneously or be induced by mutagens.Uncorrected mistakes can lead to serious consequences for the phenotype. Cells have developed several repairmechanisms to minimize the number of mutations that persist.ProofreadingMost of the mistakes introduced during DNA replication are promptly corrected by most DNA polymerases througha function called proofreading. In proofreading, the DNA polymerase reads the newly added base, ensuring that it iscomplementary to the corresponding base in the template strand before adding the next one. If an incorrect base hasbeen added, the enzyme makes a cut to release the wrong nucleotide and a new base is added.Mismatch RepairSome errors introduced during replication are corrected shortly after the replication machinery has moved. Thismechanism is called mismatch repair. The enzymes involved in this mechanism recognize the incorrectly addednucleotide, excise it, and replace it with the correct base. One example is the methyl-directed mismatch repair in E.coli. The DNA is hemimethylated. This means that the parental strand is methylated while the newly synthesizeddaughter strand is not. It takes several minutes before the new strand is methylated. Proteins MutS, MutL, and MutHbind to the hemimethylated site where the incorrect nucleotide is found. MutH cuts the nonmethylated strand (thenew strand). An exonuclease removes a portion of the strand (including the incorrect nucleotide). The gap formed isthen filled in by DNA pol III and ligase.Repair of Thymine DimersBecause the production of thymine dimers is common (many organisms cannot avoid ultraviolet light), mechanismshave evolved to repair these lesions. In nucleotide excision repair (also called dark repair), enzymes remove thepyrimidine dimer and replace it with the correct nucleotides (Figure 11.23). In E. coli, the DNA is scanned by anenzyme complex. If a distortion in the double helix is found that was introduced by the pyrimidine dimer, the enzymecomplex cuts the sugar-phosphate backbone several bases upstream and downstream of the dimer, and the segmentof DNA between these two cuts is then enzymatically removed. DNA pol I replaces the missing nucleotides with thecorrect ones and DNA ligase seals the gap in the sugar-phosphate backbone.The direct repair (also called light repair) of thymine dimers occurs through the process of photoreactivation inthe presence of visible light. An enzyme called photolyase recognizes the distortion in the DNA helix caused bythe thymine dimer and binds to the dimer. Then, in the presence of visible light, the photolyase enzyme changesconformation and breaks apart the thymine dimer, allowing the thymines to again correctly base pair with theadenines on the complementary strand. Photoreactivation appears to be present in all organisms, with the exceptionof placental mammals, including humans. Photoreactivation is particularly important for organisms chronicallyexposed to ultraviolet radiation, like plants, photosynthetic bacteria, algae, and corals, to prevent the accumulation ofmutations caused by thymine dimer formation.476 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.23 Bacteria have two mechanisms for repairing thymine dimers. (a) In nucleotide excision repair, anenzyme complex recognizes the distortion in the DNA complex around the thymine dimer and cuts and removes thedamaged DNA strand. The correct nucleotides are replaced by DNA pol I and the nucleotide strand is sealed by DNAligase. (b) In photoreactivation, the enzyme photolyase binds to the thymine dimer and, in the presence of visiblelight, breaks apart the dimer, restoring the base pairing of the thymines with complementary adenines on the oppositeDNA strand.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 477• During mismatch repair, how does the enzyme recognize which is the new and which is the old strand?• How does an intercalating agent introduce a mutation?• What type of mutation does photolyase repair?Identifying Bacterial MutantsOne common technique used to identify bacterial mutants is called replica plating. This technique is used to detectnutritional mutants, called auxotrophs, which have a mutation in a gene encoding an enzyme in the biosynthesispathway of a specific nutrient, such as an amino acid. As a result, whereas wild-type cells retain the ability togrow normally on a medium lacking the specific nutrient, auxotrophs are unable to grow on such a medium. Duringreplica plating (Figure 11.24), a population of bacterial cells is mutagenized and then plated as individual cells on acomplex nutritionally complete plate and allowed to grow into colonies. Cells from these colonies are removed fromthis master plate, often using sterile velvet. This velvet, containing cells, is then pressed in the same orientation ontoplates of various media. At least one plate should also be nutritionally complete to ensure that cells are being properlytransferred between the plates. The other plates lack specific nutrients, allowing the researcher to discover variousauxotrophic mutants unable to produce specific nutrients. Cells from the corresponding colony on the nutritionallycomplete plate can be used to recover the mutant for further study.• Why are cells plated on a nutritionally complete plate in addition to nutrient-deficient plates when looking fora mutant?The Ames TestThe Ames test, developed by Bruce Ames (1928–) in the 1970s, is a method that uses bacteria for rapid, inexpensivescreening of the carcinogenic potential of new chemical compounds. The test measures the mutation rate associatedwith exposure to the compound, which, if elevated, may indicate that exposure to this compound is associated withgreater cancer risk. The Ames test uses as the test organism a strain of Salmonella typhimurium that is a histidineauxotroph, unable to synthesize its own histidine because of a mutation in an essential gene required for its synthesis.After exposure to a potential mutagen, these bacteria are plated onto a medium lacking histidine, and the number ofmutants regaining the ability to synthesize histidine is recorded and compared with the number of such mutants thatarise in the absence of the potential mutagen (Figure 11.25). Chemicals that are more mutagenic will bring aboutmore mutants with restored histidine synthesis in the Ames test. Because many chemicals are not directly mutagenicbut are metabolized to mutagenic forms by liver enzymes, rat liver extract is commonly included at the start of thisexperiment to mimic liver metabolism. After the Ames test is conducted, compounds identified as mutagenic arefurther tested for their potential carcinogenic properties by using other models, including animal models like miceand rats.478 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.24 Identification of auxotrophic mutants, like histidine auxotrophs, is done using replica plating. Aftermutagenesis, colonies that grow on nutritionally complete medium but not on medium lacking histidine are identifiedas histidine auxotrophs.Figure 11.25 The Ames test is used to identify mutagenic, potentially carcinogenic chemicals. A Salmonellahistidine auxotroph is used as the test strain, exposed to a potential mutagen/carcinogen. The number of reversionmutants capable of growing in the absence of supplied histidine is counted and compared with the number of naturalreversion mutants that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen.• What mutation is used as an indicator of mutation rate in the Ames test?Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 479• Why can the Ames test work as a test for carcinogenicity?11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic DiversityLearning Objectives• Compare the processes of transformation, transduction, and conjugation• Explain how asexual gene transfer results in prokaryotic genetic diversity• Explain the structure and consequences for bacterial genetic diversity of transposonsTypically, when we consider genetic transfer, we think of vertical gene transfer, the transmission of geneticinformation from generation to generation. Vertical gene transfer is by far the main mode of transmission ofgenetic information in all cells. In sexually reproducing organisms, crossing-over events and independent assortmentof individual chromosomes during meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in the population. Genetic diversity isalso introduced during sexual reproduction, when the genetic information from two parents, each with differentcomplements of genetic information, are combined, producing new combinations of parental genotypes in the diploidoffspring. The occurrence of mutations also contributes to genetic diversity in a population. Genetic diversity ofoffspring is useful in changing or inconsistent environments and may be one reason for the evolutionary success ofsexual reproduction.When prokaryotes and eukaryotes reproduce asexually, they transfer a nearly identical copy of their genetic materialto their offspring through vertical gene transfer. Although asexual reproduction produces more offspring morequickly, any benefits of diversity among those offspring are lost. How then do organisms whose dominantreproductive mode is asexual create genetic diversity? In prokaryotes, horizontal gene transfer (HGT), theintroduction of genetic material from one organism to another organism within the same generation, is an importantway to introduce genetic diversity. HGT allows even distantly related species to share genes, influencing theirphenotypes. It is thought that HGT is more prevalent in prokaryotes but that only a small fraction of the prokaryoticgenome may be transferred by this type of transfer at any one time. As the phenomenon is investigated morethoroughly, it may be revealed to be even more common. Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation aresignificant sources of genetic variation, the raw material for the process of natural selection, in prokaryotes. AlthoughHGT is more common among evolutionarily related organisms, it may occur between any two species that livetogether in a natural community.HGT in prokaryotes is known to occur by the three primary mechanisms that are illustrated in Figure 11.26:1. Transformation: naked DNA is taken up from the environment2. Transduction: genes are transferred between cells in a virus (see The Viral Life Cycle)3. Conjugation: use of a hollow tube called a conjugation pilus to transfer genes between cells480 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.26 There are three prokaryote-specific mechanisms leading to horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes. a)In transformation, the cell takes up DNA directly from the environment. The DNA may remain separate as a plasmidor be incorporated into the host genome. b) In transduction, a bacteriophage injects DNA that is a hybrid of viral DNAand DNA from a previously infected bacterial cell. c) In conjugation, DNA is transferred between cells through acytoplasmic bridge after a conjugation pilus draws the two cells close enough to form the bridge.• What are three ways sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into offspring?• What is a benefit of asexual reproduction?• What are the three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes?TransformationFrederick Griffith was the first to demonstrate the process of transformation. In 1928, he showed that live,nonpathogenic Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria could be transformed into pathogenic bacteria through exposureto a heat-killed pathogenic strain. He concluded that some sort of agent, which he called the “transforming principle,”had been passed from the dead pathogenic bacteria to the live, nonpathogenic bacteria. In 1944, Oswald Avery(1877–1955), Colin MacLeod (1909–1972), and Maclyn McCarty (1911–2005) demonstrated that the transformingprinciple was DNA (see Using Microorganisms to Discover the Secrets of Life).In transformation, the prokaryote takes up naked DNA found in its environment and that is derived from other cellsthat have lysed on death and released their contents, including their genome, into the environment. Many bacteria arenaturally competent, meaning that they actively bind to environmental DNA, transport it across their cell envelopesinto their cytoplasm, and make it single stranded. Typically, double-stranded foreign DNA within cells is destroyedby nucleases as a defense against viral infection. However, these nucleases are usually ineffective against singlestrandedDNA, so this single-stranded DNA within the cell has the opportunity to recombine into the bacterialgenome. A molecule of DNA that contains fragments of DNA from different organisms is called recombinant DNA.(Recombinant DNA will be discussed in more detail in Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering.)If the bacterium incorporates the new DNA into its own genome through recombination, the bacterial cell maygain new phenotypic properties. For example, if a nonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from apathogen and then incorporates it into its chromosome, it, too, may become pathogenic. Plasmid DNA may also betaken up by competent bacteria and confer new properties to the cell. Overall, transformation in nature is a relativelyinefficient process because environmental DNA levels are low because of the activity of nucleases that are alsoChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 481released during cellular lysis. Additionally, genetic recombination is inefficient at incorporating new DNA sequencesinto the genome.In nature, bacterial transformation is an important mechanism for the acquisition of genetic elements encodingvirulence factors and antibiotic resistance. Genes encoding resistance to antimicrobial compounds have been shown tobe widespread in nature, even in environments not influenced by humans. These genes, which allow microbes livingin mixed communities to compete for limited resources, can be transferred within a population by transformation, aswell as by the other processes of HGT. In the laboratory, we can exploit the natural process of bacterial transformationfor genetic engineering to make a wide variety of medicinal products, as discussed in Microbes and the Tools ofGenetic Engineering.• Why does a bacterial cell make environmental DNA brought into the cell into a single-stranded form?TransductionViruses that infect bacteria (bacteriophages) may also move short pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacteriumto another in a process called transduction (see Figure 6.9). Recall that in generalized transduction, any pieceof chromosomal DNA may be transferred to a new host cell by accidental packaging of chromosomal DNA into aphage head during phage assembly. By contrast, specialized transduction results from the imprecise excision of alysogenic prophage from the bacterial chromosome such that it carries with it a piece of the bacterial chromosomefrom either side of the phage’s integration site to a new host cell. As a result, the host may acquire new properties.This process is called lysogenic conversion. Of medical significance, a lysogenic phage may carry with it a virulencegene to its new host. Once inserted into the new host’s chromosome, the new host may gain pathogenicity. Severalpathogenic bacteria, including Corynebacterium diphtheriae (the causative agent of diphtheria) and Clostridiumbotulinum (the causative agent of botulism), are virulent because of the introduction of toxin-encoding genes bylysogenic bacteriophages, affirming the clinical relevance of transduction in the exchange of genes involved ininfectious disease. Archaea have their own viruses that translocate genetic material from one individual to another.• What is the agent of transduction of prokaryotic cells?• In specialized transduction, where does the transducing piece of DNA come from?The Clinical Consequences of TransductionPaul, a 23-year-old relief worker from Atlanta, traveled to Haiti in 2011 to provide aid following the 2010earthquake. After working there for several weeks, he suddenly began experiencing abdominal distress,including severe cramping, nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea. He also began to experience intensemuscle cramping. At a local clinic, the physician suspected that Paul’s symptoms were caused by cholerabecause there had been a cholera outbreak after the earthquake. Because cholera is transmitted by thefecal-oral route, breaches in sanitation infrastructure, such as often occur following natural disasters, mayprecipitate outbreaks. The physician confirmed the presumptive diagnosis using a cholera dipstick test. Hethen prescribed Paul a single dose of doxycycline, as well as oral rehydration salts, instructing him to drinkCase in Point482 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5significant amounts of clean water.Cholera is caused by the gram-negative curved rod Vibrio cholerae (Figure 11.27). Its symptoms largelyresult from the production of the cholera toxin (CT), which ultimately activates a chloride transporter to pumpchloride ions out of the epithelial cells into the gut lumen. Water then follows the chloride ions, causing theprolific watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera. The gene encoding the cholera toxin is incorporated into thebacterial chromosome of V. cholerae through infection of the bacterium with the lysogenic filamentous CTXphage, which carries the CT gene and introduces it into the chromosome on integration of the prophage. Thus,pathogenic strains of V. cholerae result from horizontal gene transfer by specialized transduction.• Why are outbreaks of cholera more common as a result of a natural disaster?• Why is muscle cramping a common symptom of cholera? Why is treatment with oral rehydration saltsso important for the treatment of cholera?• In areas stricken by cholera, what are some strategies that people could use to prevent diseasetransmission?Figure 11.27 A scanning electron micrograph of Vibrio cholerae shows its characteristic curved rod shape.ConjugationIn conjugation, DNA is directly transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a conjugation pilus, whichbrings the organisms into contact with one another. In E. coli, the genes encoding the ability to conjugate are locatedon a bacterial plasmid called the F plasmid, also known as the fertility factor, and the conjugation pilus is calledthe F pilus. The F-plasmid genes encode both the proteins composing the F pilus and those involved in rolling circlereplication of the plasmid. Cells containing the F plasmid, capable of forming an F pilus, are called F+ cells or donorcells, and those lacking an F plasmid are called F− cells or recipient cells.Conjugation of the F PlasmidDuring typical conjugation in E. coli, the F pilus of an F+ cell comes into contact with an F– cell and retracts, bringingthe two cell envelopes into contact (Figure 11.28). Then a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells at the siteof the conjugation pilus. As rolling circle replication of the F plasmid occurs in the F+ cell, a single-stranded copy ofthe F plasmid is transferred through the cytoplasmic bridge to the F− cell, which then synthesizes the complementarystrand, making it double stranded. The F− cell now becomes an F+ cell capable of making its own conjugation pilus.Eventually, in a mixed bacterial population containing both F+ and F− cells, all cells will become F+ cells. Genes onthe E. coli F plasmid also encode proteins preventing conjugation between F+ cells.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 483Figure 11.28 Typical conjugation of the F plasmid from an F+ cell to an F− cell is brought about by the conjugationpilus bringing the two cells into contact. A single strand of the F plasmid is transferred to the F− cell, which is thenmade double stranded.Conjugation of F’ and Hfr CellsAlthough typical conjugation in E. coli results in the transfer of the F-plasmid DNA only, conjugation may alsotransfer chromosomal DNA. This is because the F plasmid occasionally integrates into the bacterial chromosomethrough recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome, forming an Hfr cell (Figure 11.29). “Hfr” refersto the high frequency of recombination seen when recipient F− cells receive genetic information from Hfr cellsthrough conjugation. Similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during specialized transduction, the integratedF plasmid may also be imprecisely excised from the chromosome, producing an F’ plasmid that carries with it somechromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. On conjugation, this DNA is introduced to the recipient cell andmay be either maintained as part of the F’ plasmid or be recombined into the recipient cell’s bacterial chromosome.Hfr cells may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous F plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of itto a recipient F− cell. Because the bacterial chromosome is so large, transfer of the entire chromosome takes a longtime (Figure 11.30). However, contact between bacterial cells during conjugation is transient, so it is unusual for theentire chromosome to be transferred. Host chromosomal DNA near the integration site of the F plasmid, displaced bythe unidirectional process of rolling circle replication, is more likely to be transferred and recombined into a recipientcell’s chromosome than host genes farther away. Thus, the relative location of bacterial genes on the Hfr cell’s genomecan be mapped based on when they are transferred through conjugation. As a result, prior to the age of widespreadbacterial genome sequencing, distances on prokaryotic genome maps were often measured in minutes.484 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.29 (a) The F plasmid can occasionally integrate into the bacterial chromosome, producing an Hfr cell. (b)Imprecise excision of the F plasmid from the chromosome of an Hfr cell may lead to the production of an F’ plasmidthat carries chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. This F’ plasmid can be transferred to an F− cell byconjugation.Figure 11.30 (a) An Hfr cell may attempt to transfer the entire bacterial chromosome to an F− cell, treating thechromosome like an extremely large F plasmid. However, contact between cells during conjugation is temporary.Chromosomal genes closest to the integration site (gene 1) that are first displaced during rolling circle replication willbe transferred more quickly than genes far away from the integration site (gene 4). Hence, they are more likely to berecombined into the recipient F− cell’s chromosome. (b) The time it takes for a gene to be transferred, as detected byrecombination into the F− cell’s chromosome, can be used to generate a map of the bacterial genome, such as thisgenomic map of E. coli. Note that it takes approximately 100 minutes for the entire genome (4.6 Mbp) of an Hfr strainof E. coli to be transferred by conjugation.Consequences and Applications of ConjugationPlasmids are an important type of extrachromosomal DNA element in bacteria and, in those cells that harbor them,are considered to be part of the bacterial genome. From a clinical perspective, plasmids often code for genes involvedin virulence. For example, genes encoding proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular antibiotic areencoded on R plasmids. R plasmids, in addition to their genes for antimicrobial resistance, contain genes that controlconjugation and transfer of the plasmid. R plasmids are able to transfer between cells of the same species and betweencells of different species. Single R plasmids commonly contain multiple genes conferring resistance to multipleantibiotics.Genes required for the production of various toxins and molecules important for colonization during infectionChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 485may also be found encoded on plasmids. For example, verotoxin-producing strains of E. coli (VTEC) appear tohave acquired the genes encoding the Shiga toxin from its gram-negative relative Shigella dysenteriae through theacquisition of a large plasmid encoding this toxin. VTEC causes severe diarrheal disease that may result in hemolyticuremic syndrome (HUS), which may be lead to kidney failure and death.In nonclinical settings, bacterial genes that encode metabolic enzymes needed to degrade specialized atypicalcompounds like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are also frequently encoded on plasmids. Additionally,certain plasmids have the ability to move from bacterial cells to other cell types, like those of plants and animals,through mechanisms distinct from conjugation. Such mechanisms and their use in genetic engineering are covered inModern Applications of Microbial Genetics.Click through this animation (https://openstax.org/l/22conjuganim) to learnmore about the process of conjugation.• What type of replication occurs during conjugation?• What occurs to produce an Hfr E. coli cell?• What types of traits are encoded on plasmids?TranspositionGenetic elements called transposons (transposable elements), or “jumping genes,” are molecules of DNA thatinclude special inverted repeat sequences at their ends and a gene encoding the enzyme transposase (Figure 11.31).Transposons allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a DNA molecule and integrateinto the DNA elsewhere through a process called transposition. Transposons were originally discovered in maize(corn) by American geneticist Barbara McClintock (1902–1992) in the 1940s. Transposons have since been foundin all types of organisms, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Thus, unlike the three previous mechanisms discussed,transposition is not prokaryote-specific. Most transposons are nonreplicative, meaning they move in a “cut-and-paste”fashion. Some may be replicative, however, retaining their location in the DNA while making a copy to be insertedelsewhere (“copy and paste”). Because transposons can move within a DNA molecule, from one DNA molecule toanother, or even from one cell to another, they have the ability to introduce genetic diversity. Movement within thesame DNA molecule can alter phenotype by inactivating or activating a gene.Transposons may carry with them additional genes, moving these genes from one location to another with them. Forexample, bacterial transposons can relocate antibiotic resistance genes, moving them from chromosomes to plasmids.This mechanism has been shown to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance genes ona single R plasmid in Shigella strains causing bacterial dysentery. Such an R plasmid can then be easily transferredamong a bacterial population through the process of conjugation.Link to Learning486 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.31 Transposons are segments of DNA that have the ability to move from one location to another becausethey code for the enzyme transposase. In this example, a nonreplicative transposon has disrupted gene B. Theconsequence of that the transcription of gene B may now have been interrupted.• What are two ways a transposon can affect the phenotype of a cell it moves to?Table 11.5 summarizes the processes discussed in this section.Summary of Mechanisms of Genetic Diversity in ProkaryotesTerm DefinitionConjugation Transfer of DNA through direct contact using a conjugation pilusTransduction Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria in which genes are transferred through viralinfectionTransformation Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in which naked environmental DNA is taken up by abacterial cellTransposition Process whereby DNA independently excises from one location in a DNA molecule andintegrates elsewhereTable 11.5Part 3Despite continued antibiotic treatment, Mark’s infection continued to progress rapidly. The infected regioncontinued to expand, and he had to be put on a ventilator to help him breathe. Mark’s physician orderedsurgical removal of the infected tissue. Following an initial surgery, Mark’s wound was monitored daily toensure that the infection did not return, but it continued to spread.After two additional rounds of surgery, the infection finally seemed to be contained. A few days later, Mark wasremoved from the ventilator and was able to breathe on his own. However, he had lost a great deal of skin andClinical FocusChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 487soft tissue on his lower leg.• Why does the removal of infected tissue stem the infection?• What are some likely complications of this method of treatment?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon TheoryLearning Objectives• Compare inducible operons and repressible operons• Describe why regulation of operons is importantEach nucleated cell in a multicellular organism contains copies of the same DNA. Similarly, all cells in two purebacterial cultures inoculated from the same starting colony contain the same DNA, with the exception of changes thatarise from spontaneous mutations. If each cell in a multicellular organism has the same DNA, then how is it that cellsin different parts of the organism’s body exhibit different characteristics? Similarly, how is it that the same bacterialcells within two pure cultures exposed to different environmental conditions can exhibit different phenotypes? In bothcases, each genetically identical cell does not turn on, or express, the same set of genes. Only a subset of proteins ina cell at a given time is expressed.Genomic DNA contains both structural genes, which encode products that serve as cellular structures or enzymes, andregulatory genes, which encode products that regulate gene expression. The expression of a gene is a highly regulatedprocess. Whereas regulating gene expression in multicellular organisms allows for cellular differentiation, in singlecelledorganisms like prokaryotes, it primarily ensures that a cell’s resources are not wasted making proteins that thecell does not need at that time.Elucidating the mechanisms controlling gene expression is important to the understanding of human health.Malfunctions in this process in humans lead to the development of cancer and other diseases. Understanding theinteraction between the gene expression of a pathogen and that of its human host is important for the understandingof a particular infectious disease. Gene regulation involves a complex web of interactions within a given cell amongsignals from the cell’s environment, signaling molecules within the cell, and the cell’s DNA. These interactions leadto the expression of some genes and the suppression of others, depending on circumstances.Prokaryotes and eukaryotes share some similarities in their mechanisms to regulate gene expression; however, geneexpression in eukaryotes is more complicated because of the temporal and spatial separation between the processesof transcription and translation. Thus, although most regulation of gene expression occurs through transcriptionalcontrol in prokaryotes, regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes occurs at the transcriptional level and posttranscriptionally(after the primary transcript has been made).Prokaryotic Gene RegulationIn bacteria and archaea, structural proteins with related functions are usually encoded together within the genome in ablock called an operon and are transcribed together under the control of a single promoter, resulting in the formationof a polycistronic transcript (Figure 11.32). In this way, regulation of the transcription of all of the structural genesencoding the enzymes that catalyze the many steps in a single biochemical pathway can be controlled simultaneously,because they will either all be needed at the same time, or none will be needed. For example, in E. coli, all of thestructural genes that encode enzymes needed to use lactose as an energy source lie next to each other in the lactose (orlac) operon under the control of a single promoter, the lac promoter. French scientists François Jacob (1920–2013)and Jacques Monod at the Pasteur Institute were the first to show the organization of bacterial genes into operons,488 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5through their studies on the lac operon of E. coli. For this work, they won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicinein 1965. Although eukaryotic genes are not organized into operons, prokaryotic operons are excellent models forlearning about gene regulation generally. There are some gene clusters in eukaryotes that function similar to operons.Many of the principles can be applied to eukaryotic systems and contribute to our understanding of changes in geneexpression in eukaryotes that can result pathological changes such as cancer.Each operon includes DNA sequences that influence its own transcription; these are located in a region called theregulatory region. The regulatory region includes the promoter and the region surrounding the promoter, to whichtranscription factors, proteins encoded by regulatory genes, can bind. Transcription factors influence the bindingof RNA polymerase to the promoter and allow its progression to transcribe structural genes. A repressor is atranscription factor that suppresses transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by binding to a DNAsequence within the regulatory region called the operator, which is located between the RNA polymerase binding siteof the promoter and the transcriptional start site of the first structural gene. Repressor binding physically blocks RNApolymerase from transcribing structural genes. Conversely, an activator is a transcription factor that increases thetranscription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by facilitating RNA polymerase binding to the promoter.An inducer, a third type of regulatory molecule, is a small molecule that either activates or represses transcription byinteracting with a repressor or an activator.In prokaryotes, there are examples of operons whose gene products are required rather consistently and whoseexpression, therefore, is unregulated. Such operons are constitutively expressed, meaning they are transcribed andtranslated continuously to provide the cell with constant intermediate levels of the protein products. Such genesencode enzymes involved in housekeeping functions required for cellular maintenance, including DNA replication,repair, and expression, as well as enzymes involved in core metabolism. In contrast, there are other prokaryoticoperons that are expressed only when needed and are regulated by repressors, activators, and inducers.Figure 11.32 In prokaryotes, structural genes of related function are often organized together on the genome andtranscribed together under the control of a single promoter. The operon’s regulatory region includes both thepromoter and the operator. If a repressor binds to the operator, then the structural genes will not be transcribed.Alternatively, activators may bind to the regulatory region, enhancing transcription.• What are the parts in the DNA sequence of an operon?• What types of regulatory molecules are there?Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 489Regulation by RepressionProkaryotic operons are commonly controlled by the binding of repressors to operator regions, thereby preventingthe transcription of the structural genes. Such operons are classified as either repressible operons or inducibleoperons. Repressible operons, like the tryptophan (trp) operon, typically contain genes encoding enzymes required fora biosynthetic pathway. As long as the product of the pathway, like tryptophan, continues to be required by the cell,a repressible operon will continue to be expressed. However, when the product of the biosynthetic pathway beginsto accumulate in the cell, removing the need for the cell to continue to make more, the expression of the operon isrepressed. Conversely, inducible operons, like the lac operon of E. coli, often contain genes encoding enzymes in apathway involved in the metabolism of a specific substrate like lactose. These enzymes are only required when thatsubstrate is available, thus expression of the operons is typically induced only in the presence of the substrate.The trp Operon: A Repressible OperonE. coli can synthesize tryptophan using enzymes that are encoded by five structural genes located next to each otherin the trp operon (Figure 11.33). When environmental tryptophan is low, the operon is turned on. This means thattranscription is initiated, the genes are expressed, and tryptophan is synthesized. However, if tryptophan is present inthe environment, the trp operon is turned off. Transcription does not occur and tryptophan is not synthesized.When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator; therefore, the operonis active and tryptophan is synthesized. However, when tryptophan accumulates in the cell, two tryptophan moleculesbind to the trp repressor molecule, which changes its shape, allowing it to bind to the trp operator. This binding ofthe active form of the trp repressor to the operator blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes,stopping expression of the operon. Thus, the actual product of the biosynthetic pathway controlled by the operonregulates the expression of the operon.Figure 11.33 The five structural genes needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located next to each other inthe trp operon. When tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does not bind to the operator, and the genes aretranscribed. When tryptophan is plentiful, tryptophan binds the repressor protein at the operator sequence. Thisphysically blocks the RNA polymerase from transcribing the tryptophan biosynthesis genes.490 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/22trpoperon) to learn more about thetrp operon.The lac Operon: An Inducible OperonThe lac operon is an example of an inducible operon that is also subject to activation in the absence of glucose(Figure 11.34). The lac operon encodes three structural genes necessary to acquire and process the disaccharidelactose from the environment, breaking it down into the simple sugars glucose and galactose. For the lac operon to beexpressed, lactose must be present. This makes sense for the cell because it would be energetically wasteful to createthe enzymes to process lactose if lactose was not available.In the absence of lactose, the lac repressor is bound to the operator region of the lac operon, physically preventingRNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes. However, when lactose is present, the lactose inside the cellis converted to allolactose. Allolactose serves as an inducer molecule, binding to the repressor and changing its shapeso that it is no longer able to bind to the operator DNA. Removal of the repressor in the presence of lactose allowsRNA polymerase to move through the operator region and begin transcription of the lac structural genes.Figure 11.34 The three structural genes that are needed to degrade lactose in E. coli are located next to each otherin the lac operon. When lactose is absent, the repressor protein binds to the operator, physically blocking the RNApolymerase from transcribing the lac structural genes. When lactose is available, a lactose molecule binds therepressor protein, preventing the repressor from binding to the operator sequence, and the genes are transcribed.The lac Operon: Activation by Catabolite Activator ProteinBacteria typically have the ability to use a variety of substrates as carbon sources. However, because glucose isusually preferable to other substrates, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that alternative substrates are only usedwhen glucose has been depleted. Additionally, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that the genes encoding enzymesfor using alternative substrates are expressed only when the alternative substrate is available. In the 1940s, JacquesMonod was the first to demonstrate the preference for certain substrates over others through his studies of E. coli’sgrowth when cultured in the presence of two different substrates simultaneously. Such studies generated diauxicgrowth curves, like the one shown in Figure 11.35. Although the preferred substrate glucose is used first, E. coliLink to LearningChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 491grows quickly and the enzymes for lactose metabolism are absent. However, once glucose levels are depleted, growthrates slow, inducing the expression of the enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate, lactose. Noticehow the growth rate in lactose is slower, as indicated by the lower steepness of the growth curve.The ability to switch from glucose use to another substrate like lactose is a consequence of the activity of an enzymecalled Enzyme IIA (EIIA). When glucose levels drop, cells produce less ATP from catabolism (see Catabolism ofCarbohydrates), and EIIA becomes phosphorylated. Phosphorylated EIIA activates adenylyl cyclase, an enzymethat converts some of the remaining ATP to cyclic AMP (cAMP), a cyclic derivative of AMP and important signalingmolecule involved in glucose and energy metabolism in E. coli. As a result, cAMP levels begin to rise in the cell(Figure 11.36).The lac operon also plays a role in this switch from using glucose to using lactose. When glucose is scarce, theaccumulating cAMP caused by increased adenylyl cyclase activity binds to catabolite activator protein (CAP),also known as cAMP receptor protein (CRP). The complex binds to the promoter region of the lac operon (Figure11.37). In the regulatory regions of these operons, a CAP binding site is located upstream of the RNA polymerasebinding site in the promoter. Binding of the CAP-cAMP complex to this site increases the binding ability of RNApolymerase to the promoter region to initiate the transcription of the structural genes. Thus, in the case of the lacoperon, for transcription to occur, lactose must be present (removing the lac repressor protein) and glucose levels mustbe depleted (allowing binding of an activating protein). When glucose levels are high, there is catabolite repressionof operons encoding enzymes for the metabolism of alternative substrates. Because of low cAMP levels under theseconditions, there is an insufficient amount of the CAP-cAMP complex to activate transcription of these operons. SeeTable 11.6 for a summary of the regulation of the lac operon.Figure 11.35 When grown in the presence of two substrates, E. coli uses the preferred substrate (in this caseglucose) until it is depleted. Then, enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate are expressed andgrowth resumes, although at a slower rate.492 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.36 When ATP levels decrease due to depletion of glucose, some remaining ATP is converted to cAMP byadenylyl cyclase. Thus, increased cAMP levels signal glucose depletion.Figure 11.37 (a) In the presence of cAMP, CAP binds to the promoters of operons, like the lac operon, that encodegenes for enzymes for the use of alternate substrates. (b) For the lac operon to be expressed, there must beactivation by cAMP-CAP as well as removal of the lac repressor from the operator.Conditions Affecting Transcription of the lac OperonGlucose CAP binds Lactose Repressor binds Transcription+ – – + No+ – + – Some– + – + No– + + – YesTable 11.6Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 493Watch an animated tutorial (https://openstax.org/l/22lacoperon) about theworkings of lac operon here.• What affects the binding of the trp operon repressor to the operator?• How and when is the behavior of the lac repressor protein altered?• In addition to being repressible, how else is the lac operon regulated?Global Responses of ProkaryotesIn prokaryotes, there are also several higher levels of gene regulation that have the ability to control the transcriptionof many related operons simultaneously in response to an environmental signal. A group of operons all controlledsimultaneously is called a regulon.AlarmonesWhen sensing impending stress, prokaryotes alter the expression of a wide variety of operons to respond incoordination. They do this through the production of alarmones, which are small intracellular nucleotide derivatives.Alarmones change which genes are expressed and stimulate the expression of specific stress-response genes. Theuse of alarmones to alter gene expression in response to stress appears to be important in pathogenic bacteria. Onencountering host defense mechanisms and other harsh conditions during infection, many operons encoding virulencegenes are upregulated in response to alarmone signaling. Knowledge of these responses is key to being able to fullyunderstand the infection process of many pathogens and to the development of therapies to counter this process.Alternate σ FactorsSince the σ subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase confers specificity as to which promoters should be transcribed,altering the σ factor used is another way for bacteria to quickly and globally change what regulons are transcribed ata given time. The σ factor recognizes sequences within a bacterial promoter, so different σ factors will each recognizeslightly different promoter sequences. In this way, when the cell senses specific environmental conditions, it mayrespond by changing which σ factor it expresses, degrading the old one and producing a new one to transcribe theoperons encoding genes whose products will be useful under the new environmental condition. For example, insporulating bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium (which include many pathogens), a group of σ factorscontrols the expression of the many genes needed for sporulation in response to sporulation-stimulating signals.• What is the name given to a collection of operons that can be regulated as a group?• What type of stimulus would trigger the transcription of a different σ factor?Link to Learning494 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Additional Methods of Regulation in Bacteria: Attenuation andRiboswitchesAlthough most gene expression is regulated at the level of transcription initiation in prokaryotes, there are alsomechanisms to control both the completion of transcription as well as translation concurrently. Since their discovery,these mechanisms have been shown to control the completion of transcription and translation of many prokaryoticoperons. Because these mechanisms link the regulation of transcription and translation directly, they are specific toprokaryotes, because these processes are physically separated in eukaryotes.One such regulatory system is attenuation, whereby secondary stem-loop structures formed within the 5’ end of anmRNA being transcribed determine if transcription to complete the synthesis of this mRNA will occur and if thismRNA will be used for translation. Beyond the transcriptional repression mechanism already discussed, attenuationalso controls expression of the trp operon in E. coli (Figure 11.38). The trp operon regulatory region contains aleader sequence called trpL between the operator and the first structural gene, which has four stretches of RNA thatcan base pair with each other in different combinations. When a terminator stem-loop forms, transcription terminates,releasing RNA polymerase from the mRNA. However, when an antiterminator stem-loop forms, this prevents theformation of the terminator stem-loop, so RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes.A related mechanism of concurrent regulation of transcription and translation in prokaryotes is the use of ariboswitch, a small region of noncoding RNA found within the 5’ end of some prokaryotic mRNA molecules(Figure 11.39. A riboswitch may bind to a small intracellular molecule to stabilize certain secondary structures ofthe mRNA molecule. The binding of the small molecule determines which stem-loop structure forms, thus influencingthe completion of mRNA synthesis and protein synthesis.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 495Figure 11.38 When tryptophan is plentiful, translation of the short leader peptide encoded by trpL proceeds, theterminator loop between regions 3 and 4 forms, and transcription terminates. When tryptophan levels are depleted,translation of the short leader peptide stalls at region 1, allowing regions 2 and 3 to form an antiterminator loop, andRNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes of the trp operon.496 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 11.39 Riboswitches found within prokaryotic mRNA molecules can bind to small intracellular molecules,stabilizing certain RNA structures, influencing either the completion of the synthesis of the mRNA molecule itself (left)or the protein made using that mRNA (right).Other Factors Affecting Gene Expression in Prokaryotes and EukaryotesAlthough the focus on our discussion of transcriptional control used prokaryotic operons as examples, eukaryotictranscriptional control is similar in many ways. As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic transcription can be controlled throughthe binding of transcription factors including repressors and activators. Interestingly, eukaryotic transcription can beinfluenced by the binding of proteins to regions of DNA, called enhancers, rather far away from the gene, throughDNA looping facilitated between the enhancer and the promoter (Figure 11.40). Overall, regulating transcription isa highly effective way to control gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. However, the control of geneexpression in eukaryotes in response to environmental and cellular stresses can be accomplished in additional wayswithout the binding of transcription factors to regulatory regions.Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 497Figure 11.40 In eukaryotes, an enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes transcription. Each enhancer is madeup of short DNA sequences called distal control elements. Activators bound to the distal control elements interact withmediator proteins and transcription factors. Two different genes may have the same promoter but different distalcontrol elements, enabling differential gene expression.DNA-Level ControlIn eukaryotes, the DNA molecules or associated histones can be chemically modified in such a way as to influencetranscription; this is called epigenetic regulation. Methylation of certain cytosine nucleotides in DNA in responseto environmental factors has been shown to influence use of such DNA for transcription, with DNA methylationcommonly correlating to lowered levels of gene expression. Additionally, in response to environmental factors,histone proteins for packaging DNA can also be chemically modified in multiple ways, including acetylation anddeacetylation, influencing the packaging state of DNA and thus affecting the availability of loosely wound DNA fortranscription. These chemical modifications can sometimes be maintained through multiple rounds of cell division,making at least some of these epigenetic changes heritable.This video (https://openstax.org/l/22epigreg) describes how epigeneticregulation controls gene expression.• What stops or allows transcription to proceed when attenuation is operating?• What determines the state of a riboswitch?• Describe the function of an enhancer.• Describe two mechanisms of epigenetic regulation in eukaryotes.Link to Learning498 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ResolutionAlthough Mark survived his bout with necrotizing fasciitis, he would now have to undergo a skin-graftingsurgery, followed by long-term physical therapy. Based on the amount of muscle mass he lost, it is unlikely thathis leg will return to full strength, but his physical therapist is optimistic that he will regain some use of his leg.Laboratory testing revealed the causative agent of Mark’s infection was a strain of group A streptococcus(Group A strep). As required by law, Mark’s case was reported to the state health department and ultimately tothe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). At the CDC, the strain of group A strep isolated fromMark was analyzed more thoroughly for methicillin resistance.Methicillin resistance is genetically encoded and is becoming more common in group A strep through horizontalgene transfer. In necrotizing fasciitis, blood flow to the infected area is typically limited because of the actionof various genetically encoded bacterial toxins. This is why there is typically little to no bleeding as a resultof the incision test. Unfortunately, these bacterial toxins limit the effectiveness of intravenous antibiotics inclearing infection from the skin and underlying tissue, meaning that antibiotic resistance alone does not explainthe ineffectiveness of Mark’s treatment. Nevertheless, intravenous antibiotic therapy was warranted to helpminimize the possible outcome of sepsis, which is a common outcome of necrotizing fasciitis. Through genomicanalysis by the CDC of the strain isolated from Mark, several of the important virulence genes were shownto be encoded on prophages, indicating that transduction is important in the horizontal gene transfer of thesegenes from one bacterial cell to another.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material• DNA serves two important cellular functions: It is the genetic material passed from parent to offspring andit serves as the information to direct and regulate the construction of the proteins necessary for the cell toperform all of its functions.• The central dogma states that DNA organized into genes specifies the sequences of messenger RNA(mRNA), which, in turn, specifies the amino acid sequence of proteins.• The genotype of a cell is the full collection of genes a cell contains. Not all genes are used to make proteinssimultaneously. The phenotype is a cell’s observable characteristics resulting from the proteins it is producingat a given time under specific environmental conditions.11.2 DNA Replication• The DNA replication process is semiconservative, which results in two DNA molecules, each having oneparental strand of DNA and one newly synthesized strand.• In bacteria, the initiation of replication occurs at the origin of replication, where supercoiled DNA isunwound by DNA gyrase, made single-stranded by helicase, and bound by single-stranded binding proteinto maintain its single-stranded state. Primase synthesizes a short RNA primer, providing a free 3’-OH groupto which DNA polymerase III can add DNA nucleotides.• During elongation, the leading strand of DNA is synthesized continuously from a single primer. The laggingstrand is synthesized discontinuously in short Okazaki fragments, each requiring its own primer. The RNAprimers are removed and replaced with DNA nucleotides by bacterial DNA polymerase I, and DNA ligaseseals the gaps between these fragments.• Termination of replication in bacteria involves the resolution of circular DNA concatemers by topoisomeraseIV to release the two copies of the circular chromosome.• Eukaryotes typically have multiple linear chromosomes, each with multiple origins of replication. Overall,Clinical FocusChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 499replication in eukaryotes is similar to that in prokaryotes.• The linear nature of eukaryotic chromosomes necessitates telomeres to protect genes near the end of thechromosomes. Telomerase extends telomeres, preventing their degradation, in some cell types.• Rolling circle replication is a type of rapid unidirectional DNA synthesis of a circular DNA molecule usedfor the replication of some plasmids.11.3 RNA Transcription• During transcription, the information encoded in DNA is used to make RNA.• RNA polymerase synthesizes RNA, using the antisense strand of the DNA as template by addingcomplementary RNA nucleotides to the 3’ end of the growing strand.• RNA polymerase binds to DNA at a sequence called a promoter during the initiation of transcription.• Genes encoding proteins of related functions are frequently transcribed under the control of a single promoterin prokaryotes, resulting in the formation of a polycistronic mRNA molecule that encodes multiplepolypeptides.• Unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase does not require a 3’-OH group to add nucleotides, so a primeris not needed during initiation.• Termination of transcription in bacteria occurs when the RNA polymerase encounters specific DNAsequences that lead to stalling of the polymerase. This results in release of RNA polymerase from the DNAtemplate strand, freeing the RNA transcript.• Eukaryotes have three different RNA polymerases. Eukaryotes also have monocistronic mRNA, eachencoding only a single polypeptide.• Eukaryotic primary transcripts are processed in several ways, including the addition of a 5’ cap and a 3′-poly-A tail, as well as splicing, to generate a mature mRNA molecule that can be transported out of the nucleusand that is protected from degradation.11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)• In translation, polypeptides are synthesized using mRNA sequences and cellular machinery, including tRNAsthat match mRNA codons to specific amino acids and ribosomes composed of RNA and proteins that catalyzethe reaction.• The genetic code is degenerate in that several mRNA codons code for the same amino acids. The geneticcode is almost universal among living organisms.• Prokaryotic (70S) and cytoplasmic eukaryotic (80S) ribosomes are each composed of a large subunit and asmall subunit of differing sizes between the two groups. Each subunit is composed of rRNA and protein.Organelle ribosomes in eukaryotic cells resemble prokaryotic ribosomes.• Some 60 to 90 species of tRNA exist in bacteria. Each tRNA has a three-nucleotide anticodon as well as abinding site for a cognate amino acid. All tRNAs with a specific anticodon will carry the same amino acid.• Initiation of translation occurs when the small ribosomal subunit binds with initiation factors and an initiatortRNA at the start codon of an mRNA, followed by the binding to the initiation complex of the large ribosomalsubunit.• In prokaryotic cells, the start codon codes for N-formyl-methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. Ineukaryotic cells, the start codon codes for methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. In addition, whereasribosomal binding of the mRNA in prokaryotes is facilitated by the Shine-Dalgarno sequence within themRNA, eukaryotic ribosomes bind to the 5’ cap of the mRNA.• During the elongation stage of translation, a charged tRNA binds to mRNA in the A site of the ribosome; apeptide bond is catalyzed between the two adjacent amino acids, breaking the bond between the first aminoacid and its tRNA; the ribosome moves one codon along the mRNA; and the first tRNA is moved from the Psite of the ribosome to the E site and leaves the ribosomal complex.• Termination of translation occurs when the ribosome encounters a stop codon, which does not code for atRNA. Release factors cause the polypeptide to be released, and the ribosomal complex dissociates.500 Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• In prokaryotes, transcription and translation may be coupled, with translation of an mRNA moleculebeginning as soon as transcription allows enough mRNA exposure for the binding of a ribosome, prior totranscription termination. Transcription and translation are not coupled in eukaryotes because transcriptionoccurs in the nucleus, whereas translation occurs in the cytoplasm or in association with the roughendoplasmic reticulum.• Polypeptides often require one or more post-translational modifications to become biologically active.11.5 Mutations• A mutation is a heritable change in DNA. A mutation may lead to a change in the amino-acid sequence of aprotein, possibly affecting its function.• A point mutation affects a single base pair. A point mutation may cause a silent mutation if the mRNAcodon codes for the same amino acid, a missense mutation if the mRNA codon codes for a different aminoacid, or a nonsense mutation if the mRNA codon becomes a stop codon.• Missense mutations may retain function, depending on the chemistry of the new amino acid and its locationin the protein. Nonsense mutations produce truncated and frequently nonfunctional proteins.• A frameshift mutation results from an insertion or deletion of a number of nucleotides that is not a multipleof three. The change in reading frame alters every amino acid after the point of the mutation and results in anonfunctional protein.• Spontaneous mutations occur through DNA replication errors, whereas induced mutations occur throughexposure to a mutagen.• Mutagenic agents are frequently carcinogenic but not always. However, nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic.• Chemical mutagens include base analogs and chemicals that modify existing bases. In both cases, mutationsare introduced after several rounds of DNA replication.• Ionizing radiation, such as X-rays and γ-rays, leads to breakage of the phosphodiester backbone of DNA andcan also chemically modify bases to alter their base-pairing rules.• Nonionizing radiation like ultraviolet light may introduce pyrimidine (thymine) dimers, which, during DNAreplication and transcription, may introduce frameshift or point mutations.• Cells have mechanisms to repair naturally occurring mutations. DNA polymerase has proofreading activity.Mismatch repair is a process to repair incorrectly incorporated bases after DNA replication has beencompleted.• Pyrimidine dimers can also be repaired. In nucleotide excision repair (dark repair), enzymes recognize thedistortion introduced by the pyrimidine dimer and replace the damaged strand with the correct bases, usingthe undamaged DNA strand as a template. Bacteria and other organisms may also use direct repair, in whichthe photolyase enzyme, in the presence of visible light, breaks apart the pyrimidines.• Through comparison of growth on the complete plate and lack of growth on media lacking specific nutrients,specific loss-of-function mutants called auxotrophs can be identified.• The Ames test is an inexpensive method that uses auxotrophic bacteria to measure mutagenicity of a chemicalcompound. Mutagenicity is an indicator of carcinogenic potential.11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity• Horizontal gene transfer is an important way for asexually reproducing organisms like prokaryotes toacquire new traits.• There are three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer typically used by bacteria: transformation,transduction, and conjugation.• Transformation allows for competent cells to take up naked DNA, released from other cells on their death,into their cytoplasm, where it may recombine with the host genome.• In generalized transduction, any piece of chromosomal DNA may be transferred by accidental packagingof the degraded host chromosome into a phage head. In specialized transduction, only chromosomal DNAadjacent to the integration site of a lysogenic phage may be transferred as a result of imprecise excision of theChapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics 501prophage.• Conjugation is mediated by the F plasmid, which encodes a conjugation pilus that brings an F plasmidcontainingF+ cell into contact with an F- cell.• The rare integration of the F plasmid into the bacterial chromosome, generating an Hfr cell, allows for transferof chromosomal DNA from the donor to the recipient. Additionally, imprecise excision of the F plasmid fromthe chromosome may generate an F’ plasmid that may be transferred to a recipient by conjugation.• Conjugation transfer of R plasmids is an important mechanism for the spread of antibiotic resistance inbacterial communities.• Transposons are molecules of DNA with inverted repeats at their ends that also encode the enzymetransposase, allowing for their movement from one location in DNA to another. Although found in bothprokaryotes and eukaryotes, transposons are clinically relevant in bacterial pathogens for the movement ofvirulence factors, including antibiotic resistance genes.11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory• Gene expression is a tightly regulated process.• Gene expression in prokaryotes is largely regulated at the point of transcription. Gene expression in eukaryotesis additionally regulated post-transcriptionally.• Prokaryotic structural genes of related function are often organized into operons, all controlled bytranscription from a single promoter. The regulatory region of an operon includes the promoter itself and theregion surrounding the promoter to which transcription factors can bind to influence transcription.• Although some operons are constitutively expressed, most are subject to regulation through the use oftranscription factors (repressors and activators). A repressor binds to an operator, a DNA sequence withinthe regulatory region between the RNA polymerase binding site in the promoter and first structural gene,thereby physically blocking transcription of these operons. An activator binds within the regulatory region ofan operon, helping RNA polymerase bind to the promoter, thereby enhancing the transcription of this operon.An inducer influences transcription through interacting with a repressor or activator.• The trp operon is a classic example of a repressible operon. When tryptophan accumulates, tryptophan bindsto a repressor, which then binds to the operator, preventing further transcription.• The lac operon is a classic example an inducible operon. When lactose is present in the cell, it is converted toallolactose. Allolactose acts as an inducer, binding to the repressor and preventing the repressor from bindingto the operator. This allows transcription of the structural genes.• The lac operon is also subject to activation. When glucose levels are depleted, some cellular ATP is converted into cAMP, which binds to the catabolite activator protein (CAP). The cAMP-CAP complex activatestranscription of the lac operon. When glucose levels are high, its presence prevents transcription of the lacoperon and other operons by catabolite repression.• Small intracellular molecules called alarmones are made in response to various environmental stresses,allowing bacteria to control the transcription of a group of operons, called a regulon.• Bacteria have the ability to change which σ factor of RNA polymerase they use in response to environmentalconditions to quickly and globally change which regulons are transcribed.• Prokaryotes have regulatory mechanisms, including attenuation and the use of riboswitches, tosimultaneously control the completion of transcription and translation from that transcript. These mechanismswork through the formation of stem loops in the 5’ end of an mRNA molecule currently being synthesized.• There are additional points of regulation of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In eukaryotes,epigenetic regulation by chemical modification of DNA or histones, and regulation of RNA processing aretwo methods.