Chapter 12Modern Applications of MicrobialGeneticsFigure 12.1 A thermal cycler (left) is used during a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR amplifies the number ofcopies of DNA and can assist in diagnosis of infections caused by microbes that are difficult to culture, such asChlamydia trachomatis (right). C. trachomatis causes chlamydia, the most common sexually transmitted disease inthe United States, and trachoma, the world’s leading cause of preventable blindness. (credit right: modification ofwork by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chapter Outline12.1 Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering12.2 Visualizing and Characterizing DNA, RNA, and Protein12.3 Whole Genome Methods and Pharmaceutical Applications of Genetic Engineering12.4 Gene TherapyIntroductionWatson and Crick’s identification of the structure of DNA in 1953 was the seminal event in the field of geneticengineering. Since the 1970s, there has been a veritable explosion in scientists’ ability to manipulate DNA in waysthat have revolutionized the fields of biology, medicine, diagnostics, forensics, and industrial manufacturing. Manyof the molecular tools discovered in recent decades have been produced using prokaryotic microbes. In this chapter,we will explore some of those tools, especially as they relate to applications in medicine and health care.As an example, the thermal cycler in Figure 12.1 is used to perform a diagnostic technique called the polymerasechain reaction (PCR), which relies on DNA polymerase enzymes from thermophilic bacteria. Other molecular tools,such as restriction enzymes and plasmids obtained from microorganisms, allow scientists to insert genes from humansor other organisms into microorganisms. The microorganisms are then grown on an industrial scale to synthesizeproducts such as insulin, vaccines, and biodegradable polymers. These are just a few of the numerous applications ofmicrobial genetics that we will explore in this chapter.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 50912.1 Microbes and the Tools of Genetic EngineeringLearning Objectives• Identify tools of molecular genetics that are derived from microorganisms• Describe the methods used to create recombinant DNA molecules• Describe methods used to introduce DNA into prokaryotic cells• List the types of genomic libraries and describe their uses• Describe the methods used to introduce DNA into eukaryotic cellsThe science of using living systems to benefit humankind is called biotechnology. Technically speaking, thedomestication of plants and animals through farming and breeding practices is a type of biotechnology. However,in a contemporary sense, we associate biotechnology with the direct alteration of an organism’s genetics to achievedesirable traits through the process of genetic engineering. Genetic engineering involves the use of recombinantDNA technology, the process by which a DNA sequence is manipulated in vitro, thus creating recombinant DNAmolecules that have new combinations of genetic material. The recombinant DNA is then introduced into a hostorganism. If the DNA that is introduced comes from a different species, the host organism is now considered to betransgenic.One example of a transgenic microorganism is the bacterial strain that produces human insulin (Figure 12.2).The insulin gene from humans was inserted into a plasmid. This recombinant DNA plasmid was then inserted intobacteria. As a result, these transgenic microbes are able to produce and secrete human insulin. Many prokaryotes areable to acquire foreign DNA and incorporate functional genes into their own genome through “mating” with othercells (conjugation), viral infection (transduction), and taking up DNA from the environment (transformation). Recallthat these mechanisms are examples of horizontal gene transfer—the transfer of genetic material between cells of thesame generation.Part 1Kayla, a 24-year-old electrical engineer and running enthusiast, just moved from Arizona to New Hampshireto take a new job. On her weekends off, she loves to explore her new surroundings, going for long runs in thepine forests. In July she spent a week hiking through the mountains. In early August, Kayla developed a lowfever, headache, and mild muscle aches, and she felt a bit fatigued. Not thinking much of it, she took someibuprofen to combat her symptoms and vowed to get more rest.• What types of medical conditions might be responsible for Kayla’s symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus510 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.2 Recombinant DNA technology is the artificial recombination of DNA from two organisms. In thisexample, the human insulin gene is inserted into a bacterial plasmid. This recombinant plasmid can then be used totransform bacteria, which gain the ability to produce the insulin protein.Molecular CloningHerbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen first demonstrated the complete molecular cloning process in 1973 when theysuccessfully cloned genes from the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) into a bacterial plasmid that was thenintroduced into the bacterial host Escherichia coli. Molecular cloning is a set of methods used to constructrecombinant DNA and incorporate it into a host organism; it makes use of a number of molecular tools that arederived from microorganisms.Restriction Enzymes and LigasesIn recombinant DNA technology, DNA molecules are manipulated using naturally occurring enzymes derived mainlyfrom bacteria and viruses. The creation of recombinant DNA molecules is possible due to the use of naturallyoccurring restriction endonucleases (restriction enzymes), bacterial enzymes produced as a protection mechanismto cut and destroy foreign cytoplasmic DNA that is most commonly a result of bacteriophage infection. Stewart LinnandWerner Arber discovered restriction enzymes in their 1960s studies of how E. coli limits bacteriophage replicationon infection. Today, we use restriction enzymes extensively for cutting DNA fragments that can then be splicedinto another DNA molecule to form recombinant molecules. Each restriction enzyme cuts DNA at a characteristicrecognition site, a specific, usually palindromic, DNA sequence typically between four to six base pairs in length.A palindrome is a sequence of letters that reads the same forward as backward. (The word “level” is an example ofa palindrome.) Palindromic DNA sequences contain the same base sequences in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on one strandas in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on the complementary strand. A restriction enzyme recognizes the DNA palindrome andcuts each backbone at identical positions in the palindrome. Some restriction enzymes cut to produce molecules thathave complementary overhangs (sticky ends) while others cut without generating such overhangs, instead producingblunt ends (Figure 12.3).Molecules with complementary sticky ends can easily anneal, or form hydrogen bonds between complementarybases, at their sticky ends. The annealing step allows hybridization of the single-stranded overhangs. Hybridizationrefers to the joining together of two complementary single strands of DNA. Blunt ends can also attach together, butless efficiently than sticky ends due to the lack of complementary overhangs facilitating the process. In either case,ligation by DNA ligase can then rejoin the two sugar-phosphate backbones of the DNA through covalent bonding,making the molecule a continuous double strand. In 1972, Paul Berg, a Stanford biochemist, was the first to producea recombinant DNA molecule using this technique, combining the SV40 monkey virus with E. coli bacteriophagelambda to create a hybrid.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 511Figure 12.3 (a) In this six-nucleotide restriction enzyme site, recognized by the enzyme BamHI, notice that thesequence reads the same in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on both strands. This is known as a palindrome. The cutting of theDNA by the restriction enzyme at the sites (indicated by the black arrows) produces DNA fragments with sticky ends.Another piece of DNA cut with the same restriction enzyme could attach to one of these sticky ends, forming arecombinant DNA molecule. (b) This four-nucleotide recognition site also exhibits a palindromic sequence. Thecutting of the DNA by the restriction enzyme HaeIII at the indicated sites produces DNA fragments with blunt ends.Any other piece of blunt DNA could attach to one of the blunt ends produced, forming a recombinant DNA molecule.PlasmidsAfter restriction digestion, genes of interest are commonly inserted into plasmids, small pieces of typically circular,double-stranded DNA that replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome (see Unique Characteristics ofProkaryotic Cells). In recombinant DNA technology, plasmids are often used as vectors, DNA molecules thatcarry DNA fragments from one organism to another. Plasmids used as vectors can be genetically engineered byresearchers and scientific supply companies to have specialized properties, as illustrated by the commonly usedplasmid vector pUC19 (Figure 12.4). Some plasmid vectors contain genes that confer antibiotic resistance; theseresistance genes allow researchers to easily find plasmid-containing colonies by plating them on media containing thecorresponding antibiotic. The antibiotic kills all host cells that do not harbor the desired plasmid vector, but those thatcontain the vector are able to survive and grow.Plasmid vectors used for cloning typically have a polylinker site, or multiple cloning site (MCS). A polylinker siteis a short sequence containing multiple unique restriction enzyme recognition sites that are used for inserting DNAinto the plasmid after restriction digestion of both the DNA and the plasmid. Having these multiple restriction enzymerecognition sites within the polylinker site makes the plasmid vector versatile, so it can be used for many differentcloning experiments involving different restriction enzymes.This polylinker site is often found within a reporter gene, another gene sequence artificially engineered into theplasmid that encodes a protein that allows for visualization of DNA insertion. The reporter gene allows a researcher todistinguish host cells that contain recombinant plasmids with cloned DNA fragments from host cells that only containthe non-recombinant plasmid vector. The most common reporter gene used in plasmid vectors is the bacterial lacZ512 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5gene encoding beta-galactosidase, an enzyme that naturally degrades lactose but can also degrade a colorless syntheticanalog X-gal, thereby producing blue colonies on X-gal–containing media. The lacZ reporter gene is disabled whenthe recombinant DNA is spliced into the plasmid. Because the LacZ protein is not produced when the gene is disabled,X-gal is not degraded and white colonies are produced, which can then be isolated. This blue-white screening methodis described later and shown in Figure 12.5. In addition to these features, some plasmids come pre-digested and withan enzyme linked to the linearized plasmid to aid in ligation after the insertion of foreign DNA fragments.Figure 12.4 The artificially constructed plasmid vector pUC19 is commonly used for cloning foreign DNA. Arrowsindicate the directions in which the genes are transcribed. Note the polylinker site, containing multiple uniquerestriction enzyme recognition sites, found within the lacZ reporter gene. Also note the ampicillin (amp) resistancegene encoded on the plasmid.Molecular Cloning using TransformationThe most commonly used mechanism for introducing engineered plasmids into a bacterial cell is transformation, aprocess in which bacteria take up free DNA from their surroundings. In nature, free DNA typically comes from otherlysed bacterial cells; in the laboratory, free DNA in the form of recombinant plasmids is introduced to the cell’ssurroundings.Some bacteria, such as Bacillus spp., are naturally competent, meaning they are able to take up foreign DNA.However, not all bacteria are naturally competent. In most cases, bacteria must be made artificially competent in thelaboratory by increasing the permeability of the cell membrane. This can be achieved through chemical treatmentsthat neutralize charges on the cell membrane or by exposing the bacteria to an electric field that creates microscopicpores in the cell membrane. These methods yield chemically competent or electrocompetent bacteria, respectively.Following the transformation protocol, bacterial cells are plated onto an antibiotic-containing medium to inhibit thegrowth of the many host cells that were not transformed by the plasmid conferring antibiotic resistance. A techniquecalled blue-white screening is then used for lacZ-encoding plasmid vectors such as pUC19. Blue colonies have afunctional beta-galactosidase enzyme because the lacZ gene is uninterrupted, with no foreign DNA inserted into thepolylinker site. These colonies typically result from the digested, linearized plasmid religating to itself. However,Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 513white colonies lack a functional beta-galactosidase enzyme, indicating the insertion of foreign DNA within thepolylinker site of the plasmid vector, thus disrupting the lacZ gene. Thus, white colonies resulting from this bluewhitescreening contain plasmids with an insert and can be further screened to characterize the foreign DNA. To besure the correct DNA was incorporated into the plasmid, the DNA insert can then be sequenced.View an animation of molecular cloning (https://openstax.org/l/22moleclonani) from the DNA Learning Center.• In blue-white screening, what does a blue colony mean and why is it blue?Molecular Cloning Using Conjugation or TransductionThe bacterial process of conjugation (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity) can also bemanipulated for molecular cloning. F plasmids, or fertility plasmids, are transferred between bacterial cells throughthe process of conjugation. Recombinant DNA can be transferred by conjugation when bacterial cells containing arecombinant F plasmid are mixed with compatible bacterial cells lacking the plasmid. F plasmids encode a surfacestructure called an F pilus that facilitates contact between a cell containing an F plasmid and one without an F plasmid.On contact, a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells and the F-plasmid-containing cell replicates its plasmid,transferring a copy of the recombinant F plasmid to the recipient cell. Once it has received the recombinant F plasmid,the recipient cell can produce its own F pilus and facilitate transfer of the recombinant F plasmid to an additionalcell. The use of conjugation to transfer recombinant F plasmids to recipient cells is another effective way to introducerecombinant DNA molecules into host cells.Alternatively, bacteriophages can be used to introduce recombinant DNA into host bacterial cells through amanipulation of the transduction process (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity). Inthe laboratory, DNA fragments of interest can be engineered into phagemids, which are plasmids that have phagesequences that allow them to be packaged into bacteriophages. Bacterial cells can then be infected with thesebacteriophages so that the recombinant phagemids can be introduced into the bacterial cells. Depending on the typeof phage, the recombinant DNA may be integrated into the host bacterial genome (lysogeny), or it may exist as aplasmid in the host’s cytoplasm.Link to Learning514 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.5 The steps involved in molecular cloning using bacterial transformation are outlined in this graphicflowchart.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 515• What is the original function of a restriction enzyme?• What two processes are exploited to get recombinant DNA into a bacterial host cell?• Distinguish the uses of an antibiotic resistance gene and a reporter gene in a plasmid vector.Creating a Genomic LibraryMolecular cloning may also be used to generate a genomic library. The library is a complete (or nearly complete)copy of an organism’s genome contained as recombinant DNA plasmids engineered into unique clones of bacteria.Having such a library allows a researcher to create large quantities of each fragment by growing the bacterial hostfor that fragment. These fragments can be used to determine the sequence of the DNA and the function of any genespresent.One method for generating a genomic library is to ligate individual restriction enzyme-digested genomic fragmentsinto plasmid vectors cut with the same restriction enzyme (Figure 12.6). After transformation into a bacterial host,each transformed bacterial cell takes up a single recombinant plasmid and grows into a colony of cells. All of the cellsin this colony are identical clones and carry the same recombinant plasmid. The resulting library is a collection ofcolonies, each of which contains a fragment of the original organism’s genome, that are each separate and distinct andcan each be used for further study. This makes it possible for researchers to screen these different clones to discoverthe one containing a gene of interest from the original organism’s genome.Figure 12.6 The generation of a genomic library facilitates the discovery of the genomic DNA fragment that containsa gene of interest. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)To construct a genomic library using larger fragments of genomic DNA, an E. coli bacteriophage, such as lambda,can be used as a host (Figure 12.7). Genomic DNA can be sheared or enzymatically digested and ligated into a predigestedbacteriophage lambda DNA vector. Then, these recombinant phage DNA molecules can be packaged intophage particles and used to infect E. coli host cells on a plate. During infection within each cell, each recombinantphage will make many copies of itself and lyse the E. coli lawn, forming a plaque. Thus, each plaque from a phagelibrary represents a unique recombinant phage containing a distinct genomic DNA fragment. Plaques can then bescreened further to look for genes of interest. One advantage to producing a library using phages instead of plasmidsis that a phage particle holds a much larger insert of foreign DNA compared with a plasmid vector, thus requiring amuch smaller number of cultures to fully represent the entire genome of the original organism.516 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.7 Recombinant phage DNA molecules are made by ligating digested phage particles with fragmentedgenomic DNA molecules. These recombinant phage DNA molecules are packaged into phage particles and allowedto infect a bacterial lawn. Each plaque represents a unique recombinant DNA molecule that can be further screenedfor genes of interest.To focus on the expressed genes in an organism or even a tissue, researchers construct libraries using the organism’smessenger RNA (mRNA) rather than its genomic DNA. Whereas all cells in a single organism will have the samegenomic DNA, different tissues express different genes, producing different complements of mRNA. For example, allhuman cells’ genomic DNA contains the gene for insulin, but only cells in the pancreas express mRNA directing theproduction of insulin. Because mRNA cannot be cloned directly, in the laboratory mRNA must be used as a templateby the retroviral enzyme reverse transcriptase to make complementary DNA (cDNA). A cell’s full complementof mRNA can be reverse-transcribed into cDNA molecules, which can be used as a template for DNA polymeraseto make double-stranded DNA copies; these fragments can subsequently be ligated into either plasmid vectors orbacteriophage to produce a cDNA library. The benefit of a cDNA library is that it contains DNA from only theexpressed genes in the cell. This means that the introns, control sequences such as promoters, and DNA not destinedto be translated into proteins are not represented in the library. The focus on translated sequences means that thelibrary cannot be used to study the sequence and structure of the genome in its entirety. The construction of a cDNAgenomic library is shown in Figure 12.8.Figure 12.8 Complementary DNA (cDNA) is made from mRNA by the retroviral enzyme reverse transcriptase,converted into double-stranded copies, and inserted into either plasmid vectors or bacteriophage, producing a cDNAlibrary. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 517• What are the hosts for the genomic libraries described?• What is cDNA?Introducing Recombinant Molecules into Eukaryotic HostsThe use of bacterial hosts for genetic engineering laid the foundation for recombinant DNA technology; however,researchers have also had great interest in genetically engineering eukaryotic cells, particularly those of plants andanimals. The introduction of recombinant DNA molecules into eukaryotic hosts is called transfection. Geneticallyengineered plants, called transgenic plants, are of significant interest for agricultural and pharmaceutical purposes.The first transgenic plant sold commercially was the Flavr Savr delayed-ripening tomato, which came to market in1994. Genetically engineered livestock have also been successfully produced, resulting, for example, in pigs withincreased nutritional value[1] and goats that secrete pharmaceutical products in their milk.[2]ElectroporationCompared to bacterial cells, eukaryotic cells tend to be less amenable as hosts for recombinant DNA molecules.Because eukaryotes are typically neither competent to take up foreign DNA nor able to maintain plasmids,transfection of eukaryotic hosts is far more challenging and requires more intrusive techniques for success. Onemethod used for transfecting cells in cell culture is called electroporation. A brief electric pulse induces theformation of transient pores in the phospholipid bilayers of cells through which the gene can be introduced. At thesame time, the electric pulse generates a short-lived positive charge on one side of the cell’s interior and a negativecharge on the opposite side; the charge difference draws negatively charged DNA molecules into the cell (Figure12.9).Figure 12.9 Electroporation is one laboratory technique used to introduce DNA into eukaryotic cells.MicroinjectionAn alternative method of transfection is called microinjection. Because eukaryotic cells are typically larger thanthose of prokaryotes, DNA fragments can sometimes be directly injected into the cytoplasm using a glass1. Liangxue Lai, Jing X. Kang, Rongfeng Li, Jingdong Wang, William T. Witt, Hwan Yul Yong, Yanhong Hao et al. “Generation of ClonedTransgenic Pigs Rich in Omega-3 Fatty Acids.” Nature Biotechnology 24 no. 4 (2006): 435–436.2. Raylene Ramos Moura, Luciana Magalhães Melo, and Vicente José de Figueirêdo Freitas. “Production of Recombinant Proteins in Milkof Transgenic and Non-Transgenic Goats.” Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology 54 no. 5 (2011): 927–938.518 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5micropipette, as shown in Figure 12.10.Figure 12.10 Microinjection is another technique for introducing DNA into eukaryotic cells. A microinjection needlecontaining recombinant DNA is able to penetrate both the cell membrane and nuclear envelope.Gene GunsTransfecting plant cells can be even more difficult than animal cells because of their thick cell walls. One approachinvolves treating plant cells with enzymes to remove their cell walls, producing protoplasts. Then, a gene gun is usedto shoot gold or tungsten particles coated with recombinant DNA molecules into the plant protoplasts at high speeds.Recipient protoplast cells can then recover and be used to generate new transgenic plants (Figure 12.11).Figure 12.11 Heavy-metal particles coated with recombinant DNA are shot into plant protoplasts using a gene gun.The resulting transformed cells are allowed to recover and can be used to generate recombinant plants. (a) Aschematic of a gene gun. (b) A photograph of a gene gun. (credit a, b: modification of work by JA O'Brien, SCLummis)Shuttle VectorsAnother method of transfecting plants involves shuttle vectors, plasmids that can move between bacterial andeukaryotic cells. The tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmids originating from the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens arecommonly used as shuttle vectors for incorporating genes into plants (Figure 12.12). In nature, the Ti plasmids of A.tumefaciens cause plants to develop tumors when they are transferred from bacterial cells to plant cells. Researchershave been able to manipulate these naturally occurring plasmids to remove their tumor-causing genes and insertdesirable DNA fragments. The resulting recombinant Ti plasmids can be transferred into the plant genome throughthe natural transfer of Ti plasmids from the bacterium to the plant host. Once inside the plant host cell, the gene ofChapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 519interest recombines into the plant cell’s genome.Figure 12.12 The Ti plasmid of Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a useful shuttle vector for the uptake of genes ofinterest into plant cells. The gene of interest is cloned into the Ti plasmid, which is then introduced into plant cells.The gene of interest then recombines into the plant cell’s genome, allowing for the production of transgenic plants.Viral VectorsViral vectors can also be used to transfect eukaryotic cells. In fact, this method is often used in gene therapy (seeGene Therapy) to introduce healthy genes into human patients suffering from diseases that result from geneticmutations. Viral genes can be deleted and replaced with the gene to be delivered to the patient;[3] the virus then infectsthe host cell and delivers the foreign DNA into the genome of the targeted cell. Adenoviruses are often used for thispurpose because they can be grown to high titer and can infect both nondividing and dividing host cells. However,3. William S.M. Wold and Karoly Toth. “Adenovirus Vectors for Gene Therapy, Vaccination and Cancer Gene Therapy.” Current GeneTherapy 13 no. 6 (2013): 421.520 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5use of viral vectors for gene therapy can pose some risks for patients, as discussed in Gene Therapy.• What are the methods used to introduce recombinant DNA vectors into animal cells?• Compare and contrast shuttle vectors and viral vectors.12.2 Visualizing and Characterizing DNA, RNA, andProteinLearning Objectives• Explain the use of nucleic acid probes to visualize specific DNA sequences• Explain the use of gel electrophoresis to separate DNA fragments• Explain the principle of restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and its uses• Compare and contrast Southern and northern blots• Explain the principles and uses of microarray analysis• Describe the methods uses to separate and visualize protein variants• Explain the method and uses of polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencingThe sequence of a DNA molecule can help us identify an organism when compared to known sequences housedin a database. The sequence can also tell us something about the function of a particular part of the DNA, such aswhether it encodes a particular protein. Comparing protein signatures—the expression levels of specific arrays ofproteins—between samples is an important method for evaluating cellular responses to a multitude of environmentalfactors and stresses. Analysis of protein signatures can reveal the identity of an organism or how a cell is respondingduring disease.The DNA and proteins of interest are microscopic and typically mixed in with many other molecules including DNAor proteins irrelevant to our interests. Many techniques have been developed to isolate and characterize molecules ofinterest. These methods were originally developed for research purposes, but in many cases they have been simplifiedto the point that routine clinical use is possible. For example, many pathogens, such as the bacterium Helicobacterpylori, which causes stomach ulcers, can be detected using protein-based tests. In addition, an increasing numberof highly specific and accurate DNA amplification-based identification assays can now detect pathogens such asantibiotic-resistant enteric bacteria, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and many others.Molecular Analysis of DNAIn this subsection, we will outline some of the basic methods used for separating and visualizing specific fragments ofDNA that are of interest to a scientist. Some of these methods do not require knowledge of the complete sequence ofthe DNA molecule. Before the advent of rapid DNA sequencing, these methods were the only ones available to workwith DNA, but they still form the basic arsenal of tools used by molecular geneticists to study the body’s responsesto microbial and other diseases.Nucleic Acid ProbingDNA molecules are small, and the information contained in their sequence is invisible. How does a researcher isolatea particular stretch of DNA, or having isolated it, determine what organism it is from, what its sequence is, or whatChapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 521its function is? One method to identify the presence of a certain DNA sequence uses artificially constructed piecesof DNA called probes. Probes can be used to identify different bacterial species in the environment and many DNAprobes are now available to detect pathogens clinically. For example, DNA probes are used to detect the vaginalpathogens Candida albicans, Gardnerella vaginalis, and Trichomonas vaginalis.To screen a genomic library for a particular gene or sequence of interest, researchers must know something aboutthat gene. If researchers have a portion of the sequence of DNA for the gene of interest, they can design a DNAprobe, a single-stranded DNA fragment that is complementary to part of the gene of interest and different from otherDNA sequences in the sample. The DNA probe may be synthesized chemically by commercial laboratories, or itmay be created by cloning, isolating, and denaturing a DNA fragment from a living organism. In either case, theDNA probe must be labeled with a molecular tag or beacon, such as a radioactive phosphorus atom (as is used forautoradiography) or a fluorescent dye (as is used in fluorescent in situ hybridization, or FISH), so that the probeand the DNA it binds to can be seen (Figure 12.13). The DNA sample being probed must also be denatured tomake it single-stranded so that the single-stranded DNA probe can anneal to the single-stranded DNA sample atlocations where their sequences are complementary. While these techniques are valuable for diagnosis, their directuse on sputum and other bodily samples may be problematic due to the complex nature of these samples. DNA oftenmust first be isolated from bodily samples through chemical extraction methods before a DNA probe can be used toidentify pathogens.Figure 12.13 DNA probes can be used to confirm the presence of a suspected pathogen in patient samples. Thisdiagram illustrates how a DNA probe can be used to search for a gene of interest associated with the suspectedpathogen.Part 2The mild, flu-like symptoms that Kayla is experiencing could be caused by any number of infectious agents.In addition, several non-infectious autoimmune conditions, such as multiple sclerosis, systemic lupuserythematosus (SLE), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also have symptoms that are consistent withKayla’s early symptoms. However, over the course of several weeks, Kayla’s symptoms worsened. She beganto experience joint pain in her knees, heart palpitations, and a strange limpness in her facial muscles. Inaddition, she suffered from a stiff neck and painful headaches. Reluctantly, she decided it was time to seekmedical attention.• Do Kayla’s new symptoms provide any clues as to what type of infection or other medical condition sheClinical Focus522 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5may have?• What tests or tools might a health-care provider use to pinpoint the pathogen causing Kayla’ssymptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Agarose Gel ElectrophoresisThere are a number of situations in which a researcher might want to physically separate a collection of DNAfragments of different sizes. A researcher may also digest a DNA sample with a restriction enzyme to form fragments.The resulting size and fragment distribution pattern can often yield useful information about the sequence of DNAbases that can be used, much like a bar-code scan, to identify the individual or species to which the DNA belongs.Gel electrophoresis is a technique commonly used to separate biological molecules based on size and biochemicalcharacteristics, such as charge and polarity. Agarose gel electrophoresis is widely used to separate DNA (or RNA)of varying sizes that may be generated by restriction enzyme digestion or by other means, such as the PCR (Figure12.14).Due to its negatively charged backbone, DNA is strongly attracted to a positive electrode. In agarose gelelectrophoresis, the gel is oriented horizontally in a buffer solution. Samples are loaded into sample wells on the sideof the gel closest to the negative electrode, then drawn through the molecular sieve of the agarose matrix toward thepositive electrode. The agarose matrix impedes the movement of larger molecules through the gel, whereas smallermolecules pass through more readily. Thus, the distance of migration is inversely correlated to the size of the DNAfragment, with smaller fragments traveling a longer distance through the gel. Sizes of DNA fragments within a samplecan be estimated by comparison to fragments of known size in a DNA ladder also run on the same gel. To separatevery large DNA fragments, such as chromosomes or viral genomes, agarose gel electrophoresis can be modifiedby periodically alternating the orientation of the electric field during pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). InPFGE, smaller fragments can reorient themselves and migrate slightly faster than larger fragments and this techniquecan thus serve to separate very large fragments that would otherwise travel together during standard agarose gelelectrophoresis. In any of these electrophoresis techniques, the locations of the DNA or RNA fragments in the gel canbe detected by various methods. One common method is adding ethidium bromide, a stain that inserts into the nucleicacids at non-specific locations and can be visualized when exposed to ultraviolet light. Other stains that are safer thanethidium bromide, a potential carcinogen, are now available.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 523Figure 12.14 (a) The process of agarose gel electrophoresis. (b) A researcher loading samples into a gel. (c) Thisphotograph shows a completed electrophoresis run on an agarose gel. The DNA ladder is located in lanes 1 and 9.Seven samples are located in lanes 2 through 8. The gel was stained with ethidium bromide and photographed underultraviolet light. (credit a: modification of work by Magnus Manske; credit b: modification of work by U.S. Departmentof Agriculture; credit c: modification of work by James Jacob)524 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) AnalysisRestriction enzyme recognition sites are short (only a few nucleotides long), sequence-specific palindromes, and maybe found throughout the genome. Thus, differences in DNA sequences in the genomes of individuals will lead todifferences in distribution of restriction-enzyme recognition sites that can be visualized as distinct banding patternson a gel after agarose gel electrophoresis. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis comparesDNA banding patterns of different DNA samples after restriction digestion (Figure 12.15).RFLP analysis has many practical applications in both medicine and forensic science. For example, epidemiologistsuse RFLP analysis to track and identify the source of specific microorganisms implicated in outbreaks of foodpoisoning or certain infectious diseases. RFLP analysis can also be used on human DNA to determine inheritancepatterns of chromosomes with variant genes, including those associated with heritable diseases or to establishpaternity.Forensic scientists use RFLP analysis as a form of DNA fingerprinting, which is useful for analyzing DNAobtained from crime scenes, suspects, and victims. DNA samples are collected, the numbers of copies of the sampleDNA molecules are increased using PCR, and then subjected to restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gelelectrophoresis to generate specific banding patterns. By comparing the banding patterns of samples collected fromthe crime scene against those collected from suspects or victims, investigators can definitively determine whetherDNA evidence collected at the scene was left behind by suspects or victims.Figure 12.15 RFLP analysis can be used to differentiate DNA sequences. In this example, a normal chromosome isdigested into two fragments, whereas digestion of a mutated chromosome produces only one fragment. The smallred arrows pointing to the two different chromosome segments show the locations of the restriction enzymerecognition sites. After digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis, the banding patterns reflect the change by showingthe loss of two shorter bands and the gain of a longer band. (credit: modification of work by National Center forBiotechnology Information)Southern Blots and ModificationsSeveral molecular techniques capitalize on sequence complementarity and hybridization between nucleic acids of asample and DNA probes. Typically, probing nucleic-acid samples within a gel is unsuccessful because as the DNAprobe soaks into a gel, the sample nucleic acids within the gel diffuse out. Thus, blotting techniques are commonlyused to transfer nucleic acids to a thin, positively charged membrane made of nitrocellulose or nylon. In the Southernblot technique, developed by Sir Edwin Southern in 1975, DNA fragments within a sample are first separated byagarose gel electrophoresis and then transferred to a membrane through capillary action (Figure 12.16). The DNAfragments that bind to the surface of the membrane are then exposed to a specific single-stranded DNA probe labeledChapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 525with a radioactive or fluorescent molecular beacon to aid in detection. Southern blots may be used to detect thepresence of certain DNA sequences in a given DNA sample. Once the target DNA within the membrane is visualized,researchers can cut out the portion of the membrane containing the fragment to recover the DNA fragment of interest.Figure 12.16 In the Southern blot technique, DNA fragments are first separated by agarose gel electrophoresis,then transferred by capillary action to a nylon membrane, which is then soaked with a DNA probe tagged with amolecular beacon for easy visualization.Variations of the Southern blot—the dot blot, slot blot, and the spot blot—do not involve electrophoresis, but insteadconcentrate DNA from a sample into a small location on a membrane. After hybridization with a DNA probe, thesignal intensity detected is measured, allowing the researcher to estimate the amount of target DNA present withinthe sample.A colony blot is another variation of the Southern blot in which colonies representing different clones in a genomiclibrary are transferred to a membrane by pressing the membrane onto the culture plate. The cells on the membrane arelysed and the membrane can then be probed to determine which colonies within a genomic library harbor the targetgene. Because the colonies on the plate are still growing, the cells of interest can be isolated from the plate.In the northern blot, another variation of the Southern blot, RNA (not DNA) is immobilized on the membrane andprobed. Northern blots are typically used to detect the amount of mRNA made through gene expression within atissue or organism sample.Microarray AnalysisAnother technique that capitalizes on the hybridization between complementary nucleic acid sequences is calledmicroarray analysis. Microarray analysis is useful for the comparison of gene-expression patterns between differentcell types—for example, cells infected with a virus versus uninfected cells, or cancerous cells versus healthy cells(Figure 12.17).Typically, DNA or cDNA from an experimental sample is deposited on a glass slide alongside known DNAsequences. Each slide can hold more than 30,000 different DNA fragment types. Distinct DNA fragments(encompassing an organism’s entire genomic library) or cDNA fragments (corresponding to an organism’s full526 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5complement of expressed genes) can be individually spotted on a glass slide.Once deposited on the slide, genomic DNA or mRNA can be isolated from the two samples for comparison. If mRNAis isolated, it is reverse-transcribed to cDNA using reverse transcriptase. Then the two samples of genomic DNA orcDNA are labeled with different fluorescent dyes (typically red and green). The labeled genomic DNA samples arethen combined in equal amounts, added to the microarray chip, and allowed to hybridize to complementary spots onthe microarray.Hybridization of sample genomic DNA molecules can be monitored by measuring the intensity of fluorescence atparticular spots on the microarray. Differences in the amount of hybridization between the samples can be readilyobserved. If only one sample’s nucleic acids hybridize to a particular spot on the microarray, then that spot will appeareither green or red. However, if both samples’ nucleic acids hybridize, then the spot will appear yellow due to thecombination of the red and green dyes.Although microarray technology allows for a holistic comparison between two samples in a short time, it requiressophisticated (and expensive) detection equipment and analysis software. Because of the expense, this technologyis typically limited to research settings. Researchers have used microarray analysis to study how gene expression isaffected in organisms that are infected by bacteria or viruses or subjected to certain chemical treatments.Figure 12.17 (a) The steps in microarray analysis are illustrated. Here, gene expression patterns are comparedbetween cancerous cells and healthy cells. (b) Microarray information can be expressed as a heat map. Genes areshown on the left side; different samples are shown across the bottom. Genes expressed only in cancer cells areshown in varying shades of red; genes expressed only in normal cells are shown in varying shades of green. Genesthat are expressed in both cancerous and normal cells are shown in yellow.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 527Explore microchip technology (https://openstax.org/l/22intwebmictec) atthis interactive website.• What does a DNA probe consist of?• Why is a Southern blot used after gel electrophoresis of a DNA digest?Molecular Analysis of ProteinsIn many cases it may not be desirable or possible to study DNA or RNA directly. Proteins can provide speciesspecificinformation for identification as well as important information about how and whether a cell or tissue isresponding to the presence of a pathogenic microorganism. Various proteins require different methods for isolationand characterization.Polyacrylamide Gel ElectrophoresisA variation of gel electrophoresis, called polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), is commonly used forseparating proteins. In PAGE, the gel matrix is finer and composed of polyacrylamide instead of agarose.Additionally, PAGE is typically performed using a vertical gel apparatus (Figure 12.18). Because of the varyingcharges associated with amino acid side chains, PAGE can be used to separate intact proteins based on their netcharges. Alternatively, proteins can be denatured and coated with a negatively charged detergent called sodiumdodecyl sulfate (SDS), masking the native charges and allowing separation based on size only. PAGE can be furthermodified to separate proteins based on two characteristics, such as their charges at various pHs as well as their size,through the use of two-dimensional PAGE. In any of these cases, following electrophoresis, proteins are visualizedthrough staining, commonly with either Coomassie blue or a silver stain.Link to Learning528 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.18 (a) SDS is a detergent that denatures proteins and masks their native charges, making them uniformlynegatively charged. (b) The process of SDS-PAGE is illustrated in these steps. (c) A photograph of an SDS-PAGE gelshows Coomassie stained bands where proteins of different size have migrated along the gel in response to theapplied voltage. A size standard lane is visible on the right side of the gel. (credit b: modification of work by“GeneEd”/YouTube)• On what basis are proteins separated in SDS-PAGE?Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 529Part 3When Kayla described her symptoms, her physician at first suspected bacterial meningitis, which is consistentwith her headaches and stiff neck. However, she soon ruled this out as a possibility because meningitistypically progresses more quickly than what Kayla was experiencing. Many of her symptoms still paralleledthose of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and the physician alsoconsidered Lyme disease a possibility given how much time Kayla spends in the woods. Kayla did not recallany recent tick bites (the typical means by which Lyme disease is transmitted) and she did not have the typicalbull’s-eye rash associated with Lyme disease (Figure 12.19). However, 20–30% of patients with Lyme diseasenever develop this rash, so the physician did not want to rule it out.Kayla’s doctor ordered an MRI of her brain, a complete blood count to test for anemia, blood tests assessingliver and kidney function, and additional tests to confirm or rule out SLE or Lyme disease. Her test resultswere inconsistent with both SLE and ALS, and the result of the test looking for Lyme disease antibodies was“equivocal,” meaning inconclusive. Having ruled out ALS and SLE, Kayla’s doctor decided to run additionaltests for Lyme disease.• Why would Kayla’s doctor still suspect Lyme disease even if the test results did not detect Lymeantibodies in the blood?• What type of molecular test might be used for the detection of blood antibodies to Lyme disease?Figure 12.19 A bulls-eye rash is one of the common symptoms of Lyme diseases, but up to 30% of infectedindividuals never develop a rash. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Amplification-Based DNA Analysis MethodsVarious methods can be used for obtaining sequences of DNA, which are useful for studying disease-causingorganisms. With the advent of rapid sequencing technology, our knowledge base of the entire genomes of pathogenicorganisms has grown phenomenally. We start with a description of the polymerase chain reaction, which is not asequencing method but has allowed researchers and clinicians to obtain the large quantities of DNA needed forsequencing and other studies. The polymerase chain reaction eliminates the dependence we once had on cells to makemultiple copies of DNA, achieving the same result through relatively simple reactions outside the cell.Clinical Focus530 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)Most methods of DNA analysis, such as restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis, or DNAsequencing require large amounts of a specific DNA fragment. In the past, large amounts of DNA were producedby growing the host cells of a genomic library. However, libraries take time and effort to prepare and DNA samplesof interest often come in minute quantities. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) permits rapid amplification inthe number of copies of specific DNA sequences for further analysis (Figure 12.20). One of the most powerfultechniques in molecular biology, PCR was developed in 1983 by Kary Mullis while at Cetus Corporation. PCR hasspecific applications in research, forensic, and clinical laboratories, including:• determining the sequence of nucleotides in a specific region of DNA• amplifying a target region of DNA for cloning into a plasmid vector• identifying the source of a DNA sample left at a crime scene• analyzing samples to determine paternity• comparing samples of ancient DNA with modern organisms• determining the presence of difficult to culture, or unculturable, microorganisms in humans or environmentalsamplesPCR is an in vitro laboratory technique that takes advantage of the natural process of DNA replication. The heat-stableDNA polymerase enzymes used in PCR are derived from hyperthermophilic prokaryotes. Taq DNA polymerase,commonly used in PCR, is derived from the Thermus aquaticus bacterium isolated from a hot spring in YellowstoneNational Park. DNA replication requires the use of primers for the initiation of replication to have free 3ʹ-hydroxylgroups available for the addition of nucleotides by DNA polymerase. However, while primers composed of RNA arenormally used in cells, DNA primers are used for PCR. DNA primers are preferable due to their stability, and DNAprimers with known sequences targeting a specific DNA region can be chemically synthesized commercially. TheseDNA primers are functionally similar to the DNA probes used for the various hybridization techniques describedearlier, binding to specific targets due to complementarity between the target DNA sequence and the primer.PCR occurs over multiple cycles, each containing three steps: denaturation, annealing, and extension. Machines calledthermal cyclers are used for PCR; these machines can be programmed to automatically cycle through the temperaturesrequired at each step (Figure 12.1). First, double-stranded template DNA containing the target sequence is denaturedat approximately 95 °C. The high temperature required to physically (rather than enzymatically) separate the DNAstrands is the reason the heat-stable DNA polymerase is required. Next, the temperature is lowered to approximately50 °C. This allows the DNA primers complementary to the ends of the target sequence to anneal (stick) to the templatestrands, with one primer annealing to each strand. Finally, the temperature is raised to 72 °C, the optimal temperaturefor the activity of the heat-stable DNA polymerase, allowing for the addition of nucleotides to the primer using thesingle-stranded target as a template. Each cycle doubles the number of double-stranded target DNA copies. Typically,PCR protocols include 25–40 cycles, allowing for the amplification of a single target sequence by tens of millions toover a trillion.Natural DNA replication is designed to copy the entire genome, and initiates at one or more origin sites. Primersare constructed during replication, not before, and do not consist of a few specific sequences. PCR targets specificregions of a DNA sample using sequence-specific primers. In recent years, a variety of isothermal PCR amplificationmethods that circumvent the need for thermal cycling have been developed, taking advantage of accessory proteinsthat aid in the DNA replication process. As the development of these methods continues and their use becomes morewidespread in research, forensic, and clinical labs, thermal cyclers may become obsolete.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 531Figure 12.20 The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is used to produce many copies of a specific sequence of DNA.Deepen your understanding of the polymerase chain reaction by viewing thisanimation (https://openstax.org/l/22polychareami) and working through aninteractive (https://openstax.org/l/22intexerpolchr) exercise.PCR VariationsSeveral later modifications to PCR further increase the utility of this technique. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RTPCR)is used for obtaining DNA copies of a specific mRNA molecule. RT-PCR begins with the use of the reversetranscriptase enzyme to convert mRNA molecules into cDNA. That cDNA is then used as a template for traditionalPCR amplification. RT-PCR can detect whether a specific gene has been expressed in a sample. Another recentapplication of PCR is real-time PCR, also known as quantitative PCR (qPCR). Standard PCR and RT-PCRLink to Learning532 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5protocols are not quantitative because any one of the reagents may become limiting before all of the cycles withinthe protocol are complete, and samples are only analyzed at the end. Because it is not possible to determine when inthe PCR or RT-PCR protocol a given reagent has become limiting, it is not possible to know how many cycles werecompleted prior to this point, and thus it is not possible to determine how many original template molecules werepresent in the sample at the start of PCR. In qPCR, however, the use of fluorescence allows one to monitor the increasein a double-stranded template during a PCR reaction as it occurs. These kinetics data can then be used to quantifythe amount of the original target sequence. The use of qPCR in recent years has further expanded the capabilities ofPCR, allowing researchers to determine the number of DNA copies, and sometimes organisms, present in a sample.In clinical settings, qRT-PCR is used to determine viral load in HIV-positive patients to evaluate the effectiveness oftheir therapy.DNA SequencingA basic sequencing technique is the chain termination method, also known as the dideoxy method or the SangerDNA sequencing method, developed by Frederick Sanger in 1972. The chain termination method involves DNAreplication of a single-stranded template with the use of a DNA primer to initiate synthesis of a complementarystrand, DNA polymerase, a mix of the four regular deoxynucleotide (dNTP) monomers, and a small proportionof dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs), each labeled with a molecular beacon. The ddNTPs are monomers missing ahydroxyl group (–OH) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain (Figure 12.21). Everytime a ddNTP is randomly incorporated into the growing complementary strand, it terminates the process of DNAreplication for that particular strand. This results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that are each terminatedat a different point during replication. When the reaction mixture is subjected to gel electrophoresis, the multiplenewly replicated DNA strands form a ladder of differing sizes. Because the ddNTPs are labeled, each band on the gelreflects the size of the DNA strand when the ddNTP terminated the reaction.In Sanger’s day, four reactions were set up for each DNA molecule being sequenced, each reaction containing onlyone of the four possible ddNTPs. Each ddNTP was labeled with a radioactive phosphorus molecule. The productsof the four reactions were then run in separate lanes side by side on long, narrow PAGE gels, and the bands ofvarying lengths were detected by autoradiography. Today, this process has been simplified with the use of ddNTPs,each labeled with a different colored fluorescent dye or fluorochrome (Figure 12.22), in one sequencing reactioncontaining all four possible ddNTPs for each DNA molecule being sequenced (Figure 12.23). These fluorochromesare detected by fluorescence spectroscopy. Determining the fluorescence color of each band as it passes by thedetector produces the nucleotide sequence of the template strand.Figure 12.21 A dideoxynucleotide is similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide, but is missing the 3ʹ hydroxyl group(indicated by the shaded box). When a dideoxynucleotide is incorporated into a DNA strand, DNA synthesis stops.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 533Figure 12.22 Frederick Sanger’s dideoxy chain termination method is illustrated, using ddNTPs tagged withfluorochromes. Using ddNTPs, a mixture of DNA fragments of every possible size, varying in length by only onenucleotide, can be generated. The DNA is separated on the basis of size and each band can be detected with afluorescence detector.534 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.23 This diagram summarizes the Sanger sequencing method using fluorochrome-labeled ddNTPs andcapillary gel electrophoresis.Since 2005, automated sequencing techniques used by laboratories fall under the umbrella of next generationsequencing, which is a group of automated techniques used for rapid DNA sequencing. These methods haverevolutionized the field of molecular genetics because the low-cost sequencers can generate sequences of hundredsof thousands or millions of short fragments (25 to 600 base pairs) just in one day. Although several variantsof next generation sequencing technologies are made by different companies (for example, 454 Life Sciences’pyrosequencing and Illumina’s Solexa technology), they all allow millions of bases to be sequenced quickly,making the sequencing of entire genomes relatively easy, inexpensive, and commonplace. In 454 sequencing(pyrosequencing), for example, a DNA sample is fragmented into 400–600-bp single-strand fragments, modifiedwith the addition of DNA adapters to both ends of each fragment. Each DNA fragment is then immobilized ona bead and amplified by PCR, using primers designed to anneal to the adapters, creating a bead containing manycopies of that DNA fragment. Each bead is then put into a separate well containing sequencing enzymes. To the well,each of the four nucleotides is added one after the other; when each one is incorporated, pyrophosphate is releasedas a byproduct of polymerization, emitting a small flash of light that is recorded by a detector. This provides theorder of nucleotides incorporated as a new strand of DNA is made and is an example of synthesis sequencing. NextChapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 535generation sequencers use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragmentsin order. Overall, these technologies continue to advance rapidly, decreasing the cost of sequencing and increasing theavailability of sequence data from a wide variety of organisms quickly.The National Center for Biotechnology Information houses a widely used genetic sequence database called GenBankwhere researchers deposit genetic information for public use. Upon publication of sequence data, researchers uploadit to GenBank, giving other researchers access to the information. The collaboration allows researchers to comparenewly discovered or unknown sample sequence information with the vast array of sequence data that already exists.View an animation (https://openstax.org/l/22454seqanim) about 454sequencing to deepen your understanding of this method.Using a NAAT to Diagnose a C. difficile InfectionJavier, an 80-year-old patient with a history of heart disease, recently returned home from the hospitalafter undergoing an angioplasty procedure to insert a stent into a cardiac artery. To minimize the possibilityof infection, Javier was administered intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics during and shortly after hisprocedure. He was released four days after the procedure, but a week later, he began to experiencemild abdominal cramping and watery diarrhea several times a day. He lost his appetite, became severelydehydrated, and developed a fever. He also noticed blood in his stool. Javier’s wife called the physician, whoinstructed her to take him to the emergency room immediately.The hospital staff ran several tests and found that Javier’s kidney creatinine levels were elevated comparedwith the levels in his blood, indicating that his kidneys were not functioning well. Javier’s symptoms suggesteda possible infection with Clostridium difficile, a bacterium that is resistant to many antibiotics. The hospitalcollected and cultured a stool sample to look for the production of toxins A and B by C. difficile, but the resultscame back negative. However, the negative results were not enough to rule out a C. difficile infection becauseculturing of C. difficile and detection of its characteristic toxins can be difficult, particularly in some types ofsamples. To be safe, they proceeded with a diagnostic nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). Currently NAATsare the clinical diagnostician’s gold standard for detecting the genetic material of a pathogen. In Javier’s case,qPCR was used to look for the gene encoding C. difficile toxin B (tcdB). When the qPCR analysis came backpositive, the attending physician concluded that Javier was indeed suffering from a C. difficile infection andimmediately prescribed the antibiotic vancomycin, to be administered intravenously. The antibiotic cleared theinfection and Javier made a full recovery.Because infections with C. difficile were becoming widespread in Javier’s community, his sample was furtheranalyzed to see whether the specific strain of C. difficile could be identified. Javier’s stool sample wassubjected to ribotyping and repetitive sequence-based PCR (rep-PCR) analysis. In ribotyping, a shortsequence of DNA between the 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA genes is amplified and subjected to restrictiondigestion (Figure 12.24). This sequence varies between strains of C. difficile, so restriction enzymes will cutin different places. In rep-PCR, DNA primers designed to bind to short sequences commonly found repeatedwithin the C. difficile genome were used for PCR. Following restriction digestion, agarose gel electrophoresiswas performed in both types of analysis to examine the banding patterns that resulted from each procedure(Figure 12.25). Rep-PCR can be used to further subtype various ribotypes, increasing resolution for detectingdifferences between strains. The ribotype of the strain infecting Javier was found to be ribotype 27, a strainLink to LearningCase in Point536 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5known for its increased virulence, resistance to antibiotics, and increased prevalence in the United States,Canada, Japan, and Europe.[4]• How do banding patterns differ between strains of C. difficile?• Why do you think laboratory tests were unable to detect toxin production directly?Figure 12.24 A gel showing PCR products of various Clostridium difficile strains. Javier’s sample is shownat the bottom; note that it matches ribotype 27 in the reference set. (credit: modification of work by AmericanSociety for Microbiology)Figure 12.25 Strains of infectious bacteria, such as C. difficile, can be identified by molecular analysis. PCRribotyping is commonly used to identify particular C. difficile strains. Rep-PCR is an alternate moleculartechnique that is also used to identify particular C. difficile strains. (credit b: modification of work by AmericanSociety for Microbiology)Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 537• How is PCR similar to the natural DNA replication process in cells? How is it different?• Compare RT-PCR and qPCR in terms of their respective purposes.• In chain-termination sequencing, how is the identity of each nucleotide in a sequence determined?12.3 Whole Genome Methods and PharmaceuticalApplications of Genetic EngineeringLearning Objectives• Explain the uses of genome-wide comparative analyses• Summarize the advantages of genetically engineered pharmaceutical productsAdvances in molecular biology have led to the creation of entirely new fields of science. Among these are fields thatstudy aspects of whole genomes, collectively referred to as whole-genome methods. In this section, we’ll provide abrief overview of the whole-genome fields of genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics.Genomics, Transcriptomics, and ProteomicsThe study and comparison of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes and their nucleotide sequenceand organization, is called genomics. This field has great potential for future medical advances through the study ofthe human genome as well as the genomes of infectious organisms. Analysis of microbial genomes has contributedto the development of new antibiotics, diagnostic tools, vaccines, medical treatments, and environmental cleanuptechniques.The field of transcriptomics is the science of the entire collection of mRNA molecules produced by cells. Scientistscompare gene expression patterns between infected and uninfected host cells, gaining important information aboutthe cellular responses to infectious disease. Additionally, transcriptomics can be used to monitor the gene expressionof virulence factors in microorganisms, aiding scientists in better understanding pathogenic processes from thisviewpoint.When genomics and transcriptomics are applied to entire microbial communities, we use the terms metagenomicsand metatranscriptomics, respectively. Metagenomics and metatranscriptomics allow researchers to study genes andgene expression from a collection of multiple species, many of which may not be easily cultured or cultured at all inthe laboratory. A DNA microarray (discussed in the previous section) can be used in metagenomics studies.Another up-and-coming clinical application of genomics and transcriptomics is pharmacogenomics, also calledtoxicogenomics, which involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis of information froman individual’s genomic sequence. Genomic responses to drugs can be studied using experimental animals (such aslaboratory rats or mice) or live cells in the laboratory before embarking on studies with humans. Changes in geneexpression in the presence of a drug can sometimes be an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects. Personalgenome sequence information may someday be used to prescribe medications that will be most effective and leasttoxic on the basis of the individual patient’s genotype.The study of proteomics is an extension of genomics that allows scientists to study the entire complement of proteinsin an organism, called the proteome. Even though all cells of a multicellular organism have the same set of genes,cells in various tissues produce different sets of proteins. Thus, the genome is constant, but the proteome varies and is4. Patrizia Spigaglia, Fabrizio Barbanti, Anna Maria Dionisi, and Paola Mastrantonio. “Clostridium difficile Isolates Resistant toFluoroquinolones in Italy: Emergence of PCR Ribotype 018.” Journal of Clinical Microbiology 48 no. 8 (2010): 2892–2896.538 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5dynamic within an organism. Proteomics may be used to study which proteins are expressed under various conditionswithin a single cell type or to compare protein expression patterns between different organisms.The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer, but this area of study is alsobeing applied to infectious diseases. Research is currently underway to examine the feasibility of using proteomicapproaches to diagnose various types of hepatitis, tuberculosis, and HIV infection, which are rather difficult todiagnose using currently available techniques.[5]A recent and developing proteomic analysis relies on identifying proteins called biomarkers, whose expression isaffected by the disease process. Biomarkers are currently being used to detect various forms of cancer as well asinfections caused by pathogens such as Yersinia pestis and Vaccinia virus.[6]Other “-omic” sciences related to genomics and proteomics include metabolomics, glycomics, and lipidomics, whichfocus on the complete set of small-molecule metabolites, sugars, and lipids, respectively, found within a cell.Through these various global approaches, scientists continue to collect, compile, and analyze large amounts of geneticinformation. This emerging field of bioinformatics can be used, among many other applications, for clues to treatingdiseases and understanding the workings of cells.Additionally, researchers can use reverse genetics, a technique related to classic mutational analysis, to determine thefunction of specific genes. Classic methods of studying gene function involved searching for the genes responsiblefor a given phenotype. Reverse genetics uses the opposite approach, starting with a specific DNA sequence andattempting to determine what phenotype it produces. Alternatively, scientists can attach known genes (called reportergenes) that encode easily observable characteristics to genes of interest, and the location of expression of such genesof interest can be easily monitored. This gives the researcher important information about what the gene productmight be doing or where it is located in the organism. Common reporter genes include bacterial lacZ, which encodesbeta-galactosidase and whose activity can be monitored by changes in colony color in the presence of X-gal aspreviously described, and the gene encoding the jellyfish protein green fluorescent protein (GFP) whose activity canbe visualized in colonies under ultraviolet light exposure (Figure 12.26).Figure 12.26 (a) The gene encoding green fluorescence protein is a commonly used reporter gene for monitoringgene expression patterns in organisms. Under ultraviolet light, GFP fluoresces. Here, two mice are expressing GFP,while the middle mouse is not. (b) GFP can be used as a reporter gene in bacteria as well. Here, a plate containingbacterial colonies expressing GFP is shown. (c) Blue-white screening in bacteria is accomplished through the use ofthe lacZ reporter gene, followed by plating of bacteria onto medium containing X-gal. Cleavage of X-gal by the LacZenzyme results in the formation of blue colonies. (credit a: modification of work by Ingrid Moen, Charlotte Jevne, JianWang, Karl-Henning Kalland, Martha Chekenya, Lars A Akslen, Linda Sleire, Per Ø Enger, Rolf K Reed, Anne MØyan, Linda EB Stuhr; credit b: modification of work by “2.5JIGEN.com”/Flickr; credit c: modification of work byAmerican Society for Microbiology)5. E.O. List, D.E. Berryman, B. Bower, L. Sackmann-Sala, E. Gosney, J. Ding, S. Okada, and J.J. Kopchick. “The Use of Proteomics toStudy Infectious Diseases.” Infectious Disorders-Drug Targets (Formerly Current Drug Targets-Infectious Disorders) 8 no. 1 (2008): 31–45.6. Mohan Natesan, and Robert G. Ulrich. “Protein Microarrays and Biomarkers of Infectious Disease.” International Journal of MolecularSciences 11 no. 12 (2010): 5165–5183.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 539• How is genomics different from traditional genetics?• If you wanted to study how two different cells in the body respond to an infection, what –omics field wouldyou apply?• What are the biomarkers uncovered in proteomics used for?ResolutionBecause Kayla’s symptoms were persistent and serious enough to interfere with daily activities, Kayla’sphysician decided to order some laboratory tests. The physician collected samples of Kayla’s blood,cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and synovial fluid (from one of her swollen knees) and requested PCR analysis onall three samples. The PCR tests on the CSF and synovial fluid came back positive for the presence of Borreliaburgdorferi, the bacterium that causes Lyme disease.Kayla’s physician immediately prescribed a full course of the antibiotic doxycycline. Fortunately, Kaylarecovered fully within a few weeks and did not suffer from the long-term symptoms of post-treatment Lymedisease syndrome (PTLDS), which affects 10–20% of Lyme disease patients. To prevent future infections,Kayla’s physician advised her to use insect repellant and wear protective clothing during her outdooradventures. These measures can limit exposure to Lyme-bearing ticks, which are common in many regions ofthe United States during the warmer months of the year. Kayla was also advised to make a habit of examiningherself for ticks after returning from outdoor activities, as prompt removal of a tick greatly reduces the chancesof infection.Lyme disease is often difficult to diagnose. B. burgdorferi is not easily cultured in the laboratory, and the initialsymptoms can be very mild and resemble those of many other diseases. But left untreated, the symptomscan become quite severe and debilitating. In addition to two antibody tests, which were inconclusive in Kayla’scase, and the PCR test, a Southern blot could be used with B. burgdorferi-specific DNA probes to identifyDNA from the pathogen. Sequencing of surface protein genes of Borrelia species is also being used to identifystrains within the species that may be more readily transmitted to humans or cause more severe disease.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Recombinant DNA Technology and Pharmaceutical ProductionGenetic engineering has provided a way to create new pharmaceutical products called recombinant DNApharmaceuticals. Such products include antibiotic drugs, vaccines, and hormones used to treat various diseases.Table 12.1 lists examples of recombinant DNA products and their uses.For example, the naturally occurring antibiotic synthesis pathways of various Streptomyces spp., long known fortheir antibiotic production capabilities, can be modified to improve yields or to create new antibiotics through theintroduction of genes encoding additional enzymes. More than 200 new antibiotics have been generated throughthe targeted inactivation of genes and the novel combination of antibiotic synthesis genes in antibiotic-producingStreptomyces hosts.[7]Genetic engineering is also used to manufacture subunit vaccines, which are safer than other vaccines because theycontain only a single antigenic molecule and lack any part of the genome of the pathogen (see Vaccines). ForClinical Focus7. Jose-Luis Adrio and Arnold L. Demain. “Recombinant Organisms for Production of Industrial Products.” Bioengineered Bugs 1 no. 2(2010): 116–131.540 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5example, a vaccine for hepatitis B is created by inserting a gene encoding a hepatitis B surface protein into a yeast; theyeast then produces this protein, which the human immune system recognizes as an antigen. The hepatitis B antigenis purified from yeast cultures and administered to patients as a vaccine. Even though the vaccine does not containthe hepatitis B virus, the presence of the antigenic protein stimulates the immune system to produce antibodies thatwill protect the patient against the virus in the event of exposure.[8] [9]Genetic engineering has also been important in the production of other therapeutic proteins, such as insulin,interferons, and human growth hormone, to treat a variety of human medical conditions. For example, at one time,it was possible to treat diabetes only by giving patients pig insulin, which caused allergic reactions due to smalldifferences between the proteins expressed in human and pig insulin. However, since 1978, recombinant DNAtechnology has been used to produce large-scale quantities of human insulin using E. coli in a relatively inexpensiveprocess that yields a more consistently effective pharmaceutical product. Scientists have also genetically engineeredE. coli capable of producing human growth hormone (HGH), which is used to treat growth disorders in children andcertain other disorders in adults. The HGH gene was cloned from a cDNA library and inserted into E. coli cells bycloning it into a bacterial vector. Eventually, genetic engineering will be used to produce DNA vaccines and variousgene therapies, as well as customized medicines for fighting cancer and other diseases.Some Genetically Engineered Pharmaceutical Products and ApplicationsRecombinantDNA ProductApplicationAtrial natriureticpeptideTreatment of heart disease (e.g., congestive heart failure), kidney disease, high bloodpressureDNase Treatment of viscous lung secretions in cystic fibrosisErythropoietin Treatment of severe anemia with kidney damageFactor VIII Treatment of hemophiliaHepatitis B vaccine Prevention of hepatitis B infectionHuman growthhormone Treatment of growth hormone deficiency, Turner’s syndrome, burnsHuman insulin Treatment of diabetesInterferons Treatment of multiple sclerosis, various cancers (e.g., melanoma), viral infections(e.g., Hepatitis B and C)Tetracenomycins Used as antibioticsTissue plasminogenactivator Treatment of pulmonary embolism in ischemic stroke, myocardial infarctionTable 12.1• What bacterium has been genetically engineered to produce human insulin for the treatment of diabetes?• Explain how microorganisms can be engineered to produce vaccines.8. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “Types of Vaccines.” 2013. http://www.vaccines.gov/more_info/types/#subunit.Accessed May 27, 2016.9. The Internet Drug List. Recombivax. 2015. http://www.rxlist.com/recombivax-drug.htm. Accessed May 27, 2016.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 541RNA Interference TechnologyIn Structure and Function of RNA, we described the function of mRNA, rRNA, and tRNA. In addition to thesetypes of RNA, cells also produce several types of small noncoding RNA molecules that are involved in the regulationof gene expression. These include antisense RNA molecules, which are complementary to regions of specific mRNAmolecules found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotic cells. Non-coding RNA molecules play a major role in RNAinterference (RNAi), a natural regulatory mechanism by which mRNA molecules are prevented from guiding thesynthesis of proteins. RNA interference of specific genes results from the base pairing of short, single-strandedantisense RNA molecules to regions within complementary mRNA molecules, preventing protein synthesis. Cells useRNA interference to protect themselves from viral invasion, which may introduce double-stranded RNA moleculesas part of the viral replication process (Figure 12.27).Figure 12.27 Cells like the eukaryotic cell shown in this diagram commonly make small antisense RNA moleculeswith sequences complementary to specific mRNA molecules. When an antisense RNA molecule is bound to anmRNA molecule, the mRNA can no longer be used to direct protein synthesis. (credit: modification of work byRobinson R)Researchers are currently developing techniques to mimic the natural process of RNA interference as a way to treatviral infections in eukaryotic cells. RNA interference technology involves using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) ormicroRNAs (miRNAs) (Figure 12.28). siRNAs are completely complementary to the mRNA transcript of a specificgene of interest while miRNAs are mostly complementary. These double-stranded RNAs are bound to DICER, anendonuclease that cleaves the RNA into short molecules (approximately 20 nucleotides long). The RNAs are thenbound to RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), a ribonucleoprotein. The siRNA-RISC complex binds to mRNAand cleaves it. For miRNA, only one of the two strands binds to RISC. The miRNA-RISC complex then binds tomRNA, inhibiting translation. If the miRNA is completely complementary to the target gene, then the mRNA can becleaved. Taken together, these mechanisms are known as gene silencing.542 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 12.28 This diagram illustrates the process of using siRNA or miRNA in a eukaryotic cell to silence genesinvolved in the pathogenesis of various diseases. (credit: modification of work by National Center for BiotechnologyInformation)12.4 Gene TherapyLearning Objectives• Summarize the mechanisms, risks, and potential benefits of gene therapy• Identify ethical issues involving gene therapy and the regulatory agencies that provide oversight for clinicaltrials• Compare somatic-cell and germ-line gene therapyMany types of genetic engineering have yielded clear benefits with few apparent risks. Few would question, forexample, the value of our now abundant supply of human insulin produced by genetically engineered bacteria.However, many emerging applications of genetic engineering are much more controversial, often because theirpotential benefits are pitted against significant risks, real or perceived. This is certainly the case for gene therapy, aclinical application of genetic engineering that may one day provide a cure for many diseases but is still largely anexperimental approach to treatment.Mechanisms and Risks of Gene TherapyHuman diseases that result from genetic mutations are often difficult to treat with drugs or other traditional forms oftherapy because the signs and symptoms of disease result from abnormalities in a patient’s genome. For example, apatient may have a genetic mutation that prevents the expression of a specific protein required for the normal functionof a particular cell type. This is the case in patients with Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID), a geneticdisease that impairs the function of certain white blood cells essential to the immune system.Gene therapy attempts to correct genetic abnormalities by introducing a nonmutated, functional gene into the patient’sgenome. The nonmutated gene encodes a functional protein that the patient would otherwise be unable to produce.Viral vectors such as adenovirus are sometimes used to introduce the functional gene; part of the viral genome isChapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 543removed and replaced with the desired gene (Figure 12.29). More advanced forms of gene therapy attempt to correctthe mutation at the original site in the genome, such as is the case with treatment of SCID.Figure 12.29 Gene therapy using an adenovirus vector can be used to treat or cure certain genetic diseases inwhich a patient has a defective gene. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)So far, gene therapies have proven relatively ineffective, with the possible exceptions of treatments for cystic fibrosisand adenosine deaminase deficiency, a type of SCID. Other trials have shown the clear hazards of attempting geneticmanipulation in complex multicellular organisms like humans. In some patients, the use of an adenovirus vector cantrigger an unanticipated inflammatory response from the immune system, which may lead to organ failure. Moreover,because viruses can often target multiple cell types, the virus vector may infect cells not targeted for the therapy,damaging these other cells and possibly leading to illnesses such as cancer. Another potential risk is that the modifiedvirus could revert to being infectious and cause disease in the patient. Lastly, there is a risk that the inserted genecould unintentionally inactivate another important gene in the patient’s genome, disrupting normal cell cycling andpossibly leading to tumor formation and cancer. Because gene therapy involves so many risks, candidates for genetherapy need to be fully informed of these risks before providing informed consent to undergo the therapy.Gene Therapy Gone WrongThe risks of gene therapy were realized in the 1999 case of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old patient whoreceived gene therapy as part of a clinical trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Jesse received gene therapyfor a condition called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, which leads to ammonia accumulation inthe blood due to deficient ammonia processing. Four days after the treatment, Jesse died after a massiveimmune response to the adenovirus vector.[10]Until that point, researchers had not really considered an immune response to the vector to be a legitimate risk,but on investigation, it appears that the researchers had some evidence suggesting that this was a possibleoutcome. Prior to Jesse’s treatment, several other human patients had suffered side effects of the treatment,and three monkeys used in a trial had died as a result of inflammation and clotting disorders. Despite thisinformation, it appears that neither Jesse nor his family were made aware of these outcomes when theyconsented to the therapy. Jesse’s death was the first patient death due to a gene therapy treatment andresulted in the immediate halting of the clinical trial in which he was involved, the subsequent halting of all otherCase in Point544 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5gene therapy trials at the University of Pennsylvania, and the investigation of all other gene therapy trials inthe United States. As a result, the regulation and oversight of gene therapy overall was reexamined, resultingin new regulatory protocols that are still in place today.• Explain how gene therapy works in theory.• Identify some risks of gene therapy.Oversight of Gene TherapyPresently, there is significant oversight of gene therapy clinical trials. At the federal level, three agencies regulate genetherapy in parallel: the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Office of Human Research Protection (OHRP), andthe Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Along with severallocal agencies, these federal agencies interact with the institutional review board to ensure that protocols are in placeto protect patient safety during clinical trials. Compliance with these protocols is enforced mostly on the local level incooperation with the federal agencies. Gene therapies are currently under the most extensive federal and local reviewcompared to other types of therapies, which are more typically only under the review of the FDA. Some researchersbelieve that these extensive regulations actually inhibit progress in gene therapy research. In 2013, the Institute ofMedicine (now the National Academy of Medicine) called upon the NIH to relax its review of gene therapy trials inmost cases.[11] However, ensuring patient safety continues to be of utmost concern.Ethical ConcernsBeyond the health risks of gene therapy, the ability to genetically modify humans poses a number of ethical issuesrelated to the limits of such “therapy.” While current research is focused on gene therapy for genetic diseases,scientists might one day apply these methods to manipulate other genetic traits not perceived as desirable. This raisesquestions such as:• Which genetic traits are worthy of being “corrected”?• Should gene therapy be used for cosmetic reasons or to enhance human abilities?• Should genetic manipulation be used to impart desirable traits to the unborn?• Is everyone entitled to gene therapy, or could the cost of gene therapy create new forms of social inequality?• Who should be responsible for regulating and policing inappropriate use of gene therapies?The ability to alter reproductive cells using gene therapy could also generate new ethical dilemmas. To date, thevarious types of gene therapies have been targeted to somatic cells, the non-reproductive cells within the body.Because somatic cell traits are not inherited, any genetic changes accomplished by somatic-cell gene therapy wouldnot be passed on to offspring. However, should scientists successfully introduce new genes to germ cells (eggs orsperm), the resulting traits could be passed on to offspring. This approach, called germ-line gene therapy, couldpotentially be used to combat heritable diseases, but it could also lead to unintended consequences for futuregenerations. Moreover, there is the question of informed consent, because those impacted by germ-line gene therapy10. Barbara Sibbald. “Death but One Unintended Consequence of Gene-Therapy Trial.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 164 no. 11(2001): 1612–1612.11. Kerry Grens. “Report: Ease Gene Therapy Reviews.” The Scientist, December 9, 2013. http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/38577/title/Report--Ease-Gene-Therapy-Reviews/. Accessed May 27, 2016.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 545are unborn and therefore unable to choose whether they receive the therapy. For these reasons, the U.S. governmentdoes not currently fund research projects investigating germ-line gene therapies in humans.Risky Gene TherapiesWhile there are currently no gene therapies on the market in the United States, many are in the pipeline andit is likely that some will eventually be approved. With recent advances in gene therapies targeting p53, agene whose somatic cell mutations have been implicated in over 50% of human cancers,[12] cancer treatmentsthrough gene therapies could become much more widespread once they reach the commercial market.Bringing any new therapy to market poses ethical questions that pit the expected benefits against the risks.How quickly should new therapies be brought to the market? How can we ensure that new therapies have beensufficiently tested for safety and effectiveness before they are marketed to the public? The process by whichnew therapies are developed and approved complicates such questions, as those involved in the approvalprocess are often under significant pressure to get a new therapy approved even in the face of significant risks.To receive FDA approval for a new therapy, researchers must collect significant laboratory data from animaltrials and submit an Investigational New Drug (IND) application to the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation andResearch (CDER). Following a 30-day waiting period during which the FDA reviews the IND, clinical trialsinvolving human subjects may begin. If the FDA perceives a problem prior to or during the clinical trial, theFDA can order a “clinical hold” until any problems are addressed. During clinical trials, researchers collect andanalyze data on the therapy’s effectiveness and safety, including any side effects observed. Once the therapymeets FDA standards for effectiveness and safety, the developers can submit a New Drug Application (NDA)that details how the therapy will be manufactured, packaged, monitored, and administered.Because new gene therapies are frequently the result of many years (even decades) of laboratory andclinical research, they require a significant financial investment. By the time a therapy has reached the clinicaltrials stage, the financial stakes are high for pharmaceutical companies and their shareholders. This createspotential conflicts of interest that can sometimes affect the objective judgment of researchers, their funders,and even trial participants. The Jesse Gelsinger case (see Case in Point: Gene Therapy Gone Wrong) isa classic example. Faced with a life-threatening disease and no reasonable treatments available, it is easy tosee why a patient might be eager to participate in a clinical trial no matter the risks. It is also easy to see howa researcher might view the short-term risks for a small group of study participants as a small price to pay forthe potential benefits of a game-changing new treatment.Gelsinger’s death led to increased scrutiny of gene therapy, and subsequent negative outcomes of genetherapy have resulted in the temporary halting of clinical trials pending further investigation. For example, whenchildren in France treated with gene therapy for SCID began to develop leukemia several years after treatment,the FDA temporarily stopped clinical trials of similar types of gene therapy occurring in the United States.[13]Cases like these highlight the need for researchers and health professionals not only to value human wellbeingand patients’ rights over profitability, but also to maintain scientific objectivity when evaluating the risksand benefits of new therapies.Eye on Ethics12. Zhen Wang and Yi Sun. “Targeting p53 for Novel Anticancer Therapy.” Translational Oncology 3, no. 1 (2010): 1–12.13. Erika Check. “Gene Therapy: A Tragic Setback.” Nature 420 no. 6912 (2002): 116–118.546 Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial GeneticsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Why is gene therapy research so tightly regulated?• What is the main ethical concern associated with germ-line gene therapy?Summary12.1 Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering• Biotechology is the science of utilizing living systems to benefit humankind. In recent years, the ability todirectly alter an organism’s genome through genetic engineering has been made possible due to advances inrecombinant DNA technology, which allows researchers to create recombinant DNA molecules with newcombinations of genetic material.• Molecular cloning involves methods used to construct recombinant DNA and facilitate their replication inhost organisms. These methods include the use of restriction enzymes (to cut both foreign DNA and plasmidvectors), ligation (to paste fragments of DNA together), and the introduction of recombinant DNA into a hostorganism (often bacteria).• Blue-white screening allows selection of bacterial transformants that contain recombinant plasmids using thephenotype of a reporter gene that is disabled by insertion of the DNA fragment.• Genomic libraries can be made by cloning genomic fragments from one organism into plasmid vectors orinto bacteriophage.• cDNA libraries can be generated to represent the mRNA molecules expressed in a cell at a given point.• Transfection of eukaryotic hosts can be achieved through various methods using electroporation, gene guns,microinjection, shuttle vectors, and viral vectors.12.2 Visualizing and Characterizing DNA, RNA, and Protein• Finding a gene of interest within a sample requires the use of a single-stranded DNA probe labeled with amolecular beacon (typically radioactivity or fluorescence) that can hybridize with a complementary singlestrandednucleic acid in the sample.• Agarose gel electrophoresis allows for the separation of DNA molecules based on size.• Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis allows for the visualization by agarose gelelectrophoresis of distinct variants of a DNA sequence caused by differences in restriction sites.• Southern blot analysis allows researchers to find a particular DNA sequence within a sample whereasnorthern blot analysis allows researchers to detect a particular mRNA sequence expressed in a sample.• Microarray technology is a nucleic acid hybridization technique that allows for the examination of manythousands of genes at once to find differences in genes or gene expression patterns between two samples ofgenomic DNA or cDNA,• Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) allows for the separation of proteins by size, especially if nativeprotein charges are masked through pretreatment with SDS.• Polymerase chain reaction allows for the rapid amplification of a specific DNA sequence. Variations of PCRcan be used to detect mRNA expression (reverse transcriptase PCR) or to quantify a particular sequence inthe original sample (real-time PCR).• Although the development of Sanger DNA sequencing was revolutionary, advances in next generationsequencing allow for the rapid and inexpensive sequencing of the genomes of many organisms, acceleratingthe volume of new sequence data.12.3 Whole Genome Methods and Pharmaceutical Applications of Genetic Engineering• The science of genomics allows researchers to study organisms on a holistic level and has many applicationsof medical relevance.Chapter 12 | Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics 547• Transcriptomics and proteomics allow researchers to compare gene expression patterns between differentcells and shows great promise in better understanding global responses to various conditions.• The various –omics technologies complement each other and together provide a more complete picture of anorganism’s or microbial community’s (metagenomics) state.• The analysis required for large data sets produced through genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics has ledto the emergence of bioinformatics.• Reporter genes encoding easily observable characteristics are commonly used to track gene expressionpatterns of genes of unknown function.• The use of recombinant DNA technology has revolutionized the pharmaceutical industry, allowing for therapid production of high-quality recombinant DNA pharmaceuticals used to treat a wide variety of humanconditions.• RNA interference technology has great promise as a method of treating viral infections by silencing theexpression of specific genes12.4 Gene Therapy• While gene therapy shows great promise for the treatment of genetic diseases, there are also significant risksinvolved.• There is considerable federal and local regulation of the development of gene therapies by pharmaceuticalcompanies for use in humans.• Before gene therapy use can increase dramatically, there are many ethical issues that need to be addressed bythe medical and research communities, politicians, and society at large.