Chapter 24Digestive System InfectionsFigure 24.1 E. coli O157:H7 causes serious foodborne illness. Curli fibers (adhesive surface fibers that are part ofthe extracellular matrix) help these bacteria adhere to surfaces and form biofilms. Pictured are two groups of cells,curli non-producing cells (left) and curli producing cells (right). (credit left, right: modification of work by USDA)Chapter Outline24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractIntroductionGastrointestinal (GI) diseases are so common that, unfortunately, most people have had first-hand experience with theunpleasant symptoms, such as diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort. The causes of gastrointestinal illnesscan vary widely, but such diseases can be grouped into two categories: those caused by infection (the growth of apathogen in the GI tract) or intoxication (the presence of a microbial toxin in the GI tract).Foodborne pathogens like Escherichia coli O157:H7 are among the most common sources of gastrointestinal disease.Contaminated food and water have always posed a health risk for humans, but in today’s global economy, outbreakscan occur on a much larger scale. E. coli O157:H7 is a potentially deadly strain of E. coli with a history ofcontaminating meat and produce that are not properly processed. The source of an E. coli O157:H7 outbreak can bedifficult to trace, especially if the contaminated food is processed in a foreign country. Once the source is identified,authorities may issue recalls of the contaminated food products, but by then there are typically numerous cases offood poisoning, some of them fatal.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 104924.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the DigestiveSystemLearning Objectives• Describe the major anatomical features of the human digestive system• Describe the normal microbiota of various regions in the human digestive system• Explain how microorganisms overcome the defenses of the digestive tract to cause infection or intoxication• Describe general signs and symptoms associated with infections of the digestive systemThe human digestive system, or the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, begins with the mouth and ends with the anus. Theparts of the mouth include the teeth, the gums, the tongue, the oral vestibule (the space between the gums, lips, andteeth), and the oral cavity proper (the space behind the teeth and gums). Other parts of the GI tract are the pharynx,esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and anus (Figure 24.2). Accessory digestive organsinclude the salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas.The digestive system contains normal microbiota, including archaea, bacteria, fungi, protists, and even viruses.Because this microbiota is important for normal functioning of the digestive system, alterations to the microbiota byantibiotics or diet can be harmful. Additionally, the introduction of pathogens to the GI tract can cause infections anddiseases. In this section, we will review the microbiota found in a healthy digestive tract and the general signs andsymptoms associated with oral and GI infections.Part 1After a morning of playing outside, four-year-old Carli ran inside for lunch. After taking a bite of her fried egg,she pushed it away and whined, “It’s too slimy, Mommy. I don’t want any more.” But her mother, in no mood forgames, curtly replied that if she wanted to go back outside she had better finish her lunch. Reluctantly, Carlicomplied, trying hard not to gag as she choked down the runny egg.That night, Carli woke up feeling nauseated. She cried for her parents and then began to vomit. Her parentstried to comfort her, but she continued to vomit all night and began to have diarrhea and run a fever. By themorning, her parents were very worried. They rushed her to the emergency room.• What could have caused Carli’s signs and symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1050 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.2 The digestive system, or the gastrointestinal tract, includes all of the organs associated with thedigestion of food.Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Oral CavityFood enters the digestive tract through the mouth, where mechanical digestion (by chewing) and chemical digestion(by enzymes in saliva) begin. Within the mouth are the tongue, teeth, and salivary glands, including the parotid,sublingual, and submandibular glands (Figure 24.3). The salivary glands produce saliva, which lubricates food andcontains digestive enzymes.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1051Figure 24.3 (a) When food enters the mouth, digestion begins. (b) Salivary glands are accessory digestive organs.(credit: modification of work by National Cancer Institute)The structure of a tooth (Figure 24.4) begins with the visible outer surface, called the crown, which has to beextremely hard to withstand the force of biting and chewing. The crown is covered with enamel, which is the hardestmaterial in the body. Underneath the crown, a layer of relatively hard dentin extends into the root of the tooth aroundthe innermost pulp cavity, which includes the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal, or root canal,located in the root. The pulp that fills the pulp cavity is rich in blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, connective tissue, andnerves. The root of the tooth and some of the crown are covered with cementum, which works with the periodontalligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone. The soft tissues surrounding the teeth and bones are calledgums, or gingiva. The gingival space or gingival crevice is located between the gums and teeth.Figure 24.4 The tooth has a visible crown with an outer layer of enamel, a layer of dentin, and an inner pulp. Theroot, hidden by the gums, contains the pulp canal (root canal). (credit: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)Microbes such as bacteria and archaea are abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surfaces of the oral cavity.However, different structures, such as the teeth or cheeks, host unique communities of both aerobic and anaerobic1052 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5microbes. Some factors appear to work against making the mouth hospitable to certain microbes. For example,chewing allows microbes to mix better with saliva so they can be swallowed or spit out more easily. Saliva alsocontains enzymes, including lysozyme, which can damage microbial cells. Recall that lysozyme is part of the firstline of defense in the innate immune system and cleaves the β-(1,4) glycosidic linkages between N-acetylglucosamine(NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) in bacterial peptidoglycan (see Chemical Defenses). Additionally,fluids containing immunoglobulins and phagocytic cells are produced in the gingival spaces. Despite all of thesechemical and mechanical activities, the mouth supports a large microbial community.• What factors make the mouth inhospitable for certain microbes?Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the GI TractAs food leaves the oral cavity, it travels through the pharynx, or the back of the throat, and moves into the esophagus,which carries the food from the pharynx to the stomach without adding any additional digestive enzymes. Thestomach produces mucus to protect its lining, as well as digestive enzymes and acid to break down food. Partiallydigested food then leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter, reaching the first part of the small intestine calledthe duodenum. Pancreatic juice, which includes enzymes and bicarbonate ions, is released into the small intestine toneutralize the acidic material from the stomach and to assist in digestion. Bile, produced by the liver but stored in thegallbladder, is also released into the small intestine to emulsify fats so that they can travel in the watery environmentof the small intestine. Digestion continues in the small intestine, where the majority of nutrients contained in the foodare absorbed. Simple columnar epithelial cells called enterocytes line the lumen surface of the small intestinal foldscalled villi. Each enterocyte has smaller microvilli (cytoplasmic membrane extensions) on the cellular apical surfacethat increase the surface area to allow more absorption of nutrients to occur (Figure 24.5).Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1053Figure 24.5 (a) The structure of the wall of the small intestine allows for the majority of nutrient absorption in thebody. (b) Villi are folds in the surface of the small intestine. Microvilli are cytoplasmic extensions on individual cellsthat increase the surface area for absorption. (c) A light micrograph shows the shape of the villi. (d) An electronmicrograph shows the shape of the microvilli. (credit b, c, d: Modification of micrographs provided by the Regents ofUniversity of Michigan Medical School © 2012)Digested food leaves the small intestine and moves into the large intestine, or colon, where there is a more diversemicrobiota. Near this junction, there is a small pouch in the large intestine called the cecum, which attaches to theappendix. Further digestion occurs throughout the colon and water is reabsorbed, then waste is excreted through therectum, the last section of the colon, and out of the body through the anus (Figure 24.2).The environment of most of the GI tract is harsh, which serves two purposes: digestion and immunity. The stomach isan extremely acidic environment (pH 1.5–3.5) due to the gastric juices that break down food and kill many ingestedmicrobes; this helps prevent infection from pathogens. The environment in the small intestine is less harsh and is ableto support microbial communities. Microorganisms present in the small intestine can include lactobacilli, diptherioidsand the fungus Candida. On the other hand, the large intestine (colon) contains a diverse and abundant microbiotathat is important for normal function. These microbes include Bacteriodetes (especially the genera Bacteroidesand Prevotella) and Firmicutes (especially members of the genus Clostridium). Methanogenic archaea and somefungi are also present, among many other species of bacteria. These microbes all aid in digestion and contributeto the production of feces, the waste excreted from the digestive tract, and flatus, the gas produced from microbialfermentation of undigested food. They can also produce valuable nutrients. For example, lactic acid bacteria such as1054 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5bifidobacteria can synthesize vitamins, such as vitamin B12, folate, and riboflavin, that humans cannot synthesizethemselves. E. coli found in the intestine can also break down food and help the body produce vitamin K, which isimportant for blood coagulation.The GI tract has several other methods of reducing the risk of infection by pathogens. Small aggregates of underlyinglymphoid tissue in the ileum, called Peyer’s patches (Figure 24.5), detect pathogens in the intestines via microfold(M) cells, which transfer antigens from the lumen of the intestine to the lymphocytes on Peyer’s patches to inducean immune response. The Peyer’s patches then secrete IgA and other pathogen-specific antibodies into the intestinallumen to help keep intestinal microbes at safe levels. Goblet cells, which are modified simple columnar epithelialcells, also line the GI tract (Figure 24.6). Goblet cells secrete a gel-forming mucin, which is the major componentof mucus. The production of a protective layer of mucus helps reduce the risk of pathogens reaching deeper tissues.The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal tract also helps to move transient pathogens out ofthe body. In fact, feces are composed of approximately 25% microbes, 25% sloughed epithelial cells, 25% mucus,and 25% digested or undigested food. Finally, the normal microbiota provides an additional barrier to infection via avariety of mechanisms. For example, these organisms outcompete potential pathogens for space and nutrients withinthe intestine. This is known as competitive exclusion. Members of the microbiota may also secrete protein toxinsknown as bacteriocins that are able to bind to specific receptors on the surface of susceptible bacteria.Figure 24.6 A magnified image of intestinal villi in the GI tract shows goblet cells. These cells are important inproducing a protective layer of mucus.• Compare and contrast the microbiota of the small and large intestines.General Signs and Symptoms of Oral and GI DiseaseDespite numerous defense mechanisms that protect against infection, all parts of the digestive tract can becomesites of infection or intoxication. The term food poisoning is sometimes used as a catch-all for GI infections andintoxications, but not all forms of GI disease originate with foodborne pathogens or toxins.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1055In the mouth, fermentation by anaerobic microbes produces acids that damage the teeth and gums. This can lead totooth decay, cavities, and periodontal disease, a condition characterized by chronic inflammation and erosion of thegums. Additionally, some pathogens can cause infections of the mucosa, glands, and other structures in the mouth,resulting in inflammation, sores, cankers, and other lesions. An open sore in the mouth or GI tract is typically calledan ulcer.Infections and intoxications of the lower GI tract often produce symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, aches,and fever. In some cases, vomiting and diarrhea may cause severe dehydration and other complications that canbecome serious or fatal. Various clinical terms are used to describe gastrointestinal symptoms. For example, gastritisis an inflammation of the stomach lining that results in swelling and enteritis refers to inflammation of the intestinalmucosa. When the inflammation involves both the stomach lining and the intestinal lining, the condition is calledgastroenteritis. Inflammation of the liver is called hepatitis. Inflammation of the colon, called colitis, commonlyoccurs in cases of food intoxication. Because an inflamed colon does not reabsorb water as effectively as it normallydoes, stools become watery, causing diarrhea. Damage to the epithelial cells of the colon can also cause bleeding andexcess mucus to appear in watery stools, a condition called dysentery.• List possible causes and signs and symptoms of food poisoning.24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral CavityLearning Objectives• Explain the role of microbial activity in diseases of the mouth and oral cavity• Compare the major characteristics of specific oral diseases and infectionsDespite the presence of saliva and the mechanical forces of chewing and eating, some microbes thrive in the mouth.These microbes can cause damage to the teeth and can cause infections that have the potential to spread beyond themouth and sometimes throughout the body.Dental CariesCavities of the teeth, known clinically as dental caries, are microbial lesions that cause damage to the teeth. Overtime, the lesion can grow through the outer enamel layer to infect the underlying dentin or even the innermost pulp. Ifdental caries are not treated, the infection can become an abscess that spreads to the deeper tissues of the teeth, nearthe roots, or to the bloodstream.Tooth decay results from the metabolic activity of microbes that live on the teeth. A layer of proteins andcarbohydrates forms when clean teeth come into contact with saliva. Microbes are attracted to this food sourceand form a biofilm called plaque. The most important cariogenic species in these biofilms is Streptococcus mutans.When sucrose, a disaccharide sugar from food, is broken down by bacteria in the mouth, glucose and fructose areproduced. The glucose is used to make dextran, which is part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Fructoseis fermented, producing organic acids such as lactic acid. These acids dissolve the minerals of the tooth, includingenamel, even though it is the hardest material in the body. The acids work even more quickly on exposed dentin(Figure 24.7). Over time, the plaque biofilm can become thick and eventually calcify. When a heavy plaque depositbecomes hardened in this way, it is called tartar or dental calculus (Figure 24.8). These substantial plaque biofilmscan include a variety of bacterial species, including Streptococcus and Actinomyces species.1056 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.7 Tooth decay occurs in stages. When bacterial biofilms (plaque) develop on teeth, the acids producedgradually dissolve the enamel, followed by the dentin. Eventually, if left untreated, the lesion may reach the pulp andcause an abscess. (credit: modification of work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)Figure 24.8 (a) Tartar (dental calculus) is visible at the bases of these teeth. The darker deposits higher on thecrowns are staining. (b) This tooth shows only a small amount of visible decay. (c) An X-ray of the same tooth showsthat there is a dark area representing more decay inside the tooth. (d) Removal of a portion of the crown reveals thearea of damage. (e) All of the cavity must be removed before filling. (credit: modification of work by“DRosenbach”/Wikimedia Commons)Some tooth decay is visible from the outside, but it is not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1057X-ray imaging is used to produce radiographs that can be studied to look for deeper decay and damage to the root orbone (Figure 24.8). If not detected, the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream. Painful abscessescan develop.To prevent tooth decay, prophylactic treatment and good hygiene are important. Regular tooth brushing and flossingphysically removes microbes and combats microbial growth and biofilm formation. Toothpaste contains fluoride,which becomes incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel, protecting it against acidity caused byfermentation of mouth microbiota. Fluoride is also bacteriostatic, thus slowing enamel degradation. Antisepticmouthwashes commonly contain plant-derived phenolics like thymol and eucalyptol and/or heavy metals like zincchloride (see Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms). Phenolics tend to be stable and persistent onsurfaces, and they act through denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.Regular dental cleanings allow for the detection of decay at early stages and the removal of tartar. They may also helpto draw attention to other concerns, such as damage to the enamel from acidic drinks. Reducing sugar consumptionmay help prevent damage that results from the microbial fermentation of sugars. Additionally, sugarless candies orgum with sugar alcohols (such as xylitol) can reduce the production of acids because these are fermented to nonacidiccompounds (although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress). Fluoride treatment or ingestingfluoridated water strengthens the minerals in teeth and reduces the incidence of dental caries.If caries develop, prompt treatment prevents worsening. Smaller areas of decay can be drilled to remove affectedtissue and then filled. If the pulp is affected, then a root canal may be needed to completely remove the infected tissuesto avoid continued spread of the infection, which could lead to painful abscesses.• Name some ways that microbes contribute to tooth decay.• What is the most important cariogenic species of bacteria?Periodontal DiseaseIn addition to damage to the teeth themselves, the surrounding structures can be affected by microbes. Periodontaldisease is the result of infections that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structures surrounding theteeth. The progression from mild to severe periodontal disease is generally reversible and preventable with good oralhygiene.Inflammation of the gums that can lead to irritation and bleeding is called gingivitis. When plaque accumulateson the teeth, bacteria colonize the gingival space. As this space becomes increasingly blocked, the environmentbecomes anaerobic. This allows a wide variety of microbes to colonize, including Porphyromonas, Streptococcus,and Actinomyces. The bacterial products, which include lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proteases, lipoteichoic acids, andothers, cause inflammation and gum damage (Figure 24.9). It is possible that methanogenic archaeans (includingMethanobrevibacter oralis and other Methanobrevibacter species) also contribute to disease progression as somespecies have been identified in patients with periodontal disease, but this has proven difficult to study.[1][2][3] Gingivitisis diagnosed by visual inspection, including measuring pockets in the gums, and X-rays, and is usually treated usinggood dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning, with antibiotics reserved for severe cases.1. Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads. “Methanogenic Archaea and Oral Infections—Ways to Unravel the Black Box.” Journal of OralMicrobiology 3(2011). doi: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940.2. Hiroshi Maeda, Kimito Hirai, Junji Mineshiba, Tadashi Yamamoto, Susumu Kokeguchi, and Shogo Takashiba. “Medical MicrobiologicalApproach to Archaea in Oral Infectious Diseases.” Japanese Dental Science Review 49: 2, p. 72–78.3. Paul W. Lepp, Mary M. Brinig, Cleber C. Ouverney, Katherine Palm, Gary C. Armitage, and David A. Relman. “Methanogenic Archaeaand Human Periodontal Disease.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (2003): 16, pp.6176–6181. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308766101.1058 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.9 Redness and irritation of the gums are evidence of gingivitis.Over time, chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of periodontitis (Figure 24.10). Whenthis happens, the gums recede and expose parts of the tooth below the crown. This newly exposed area is relativelyunprotected, so bacteria can grow on it and spread underneath the enamel of the crown and cause cavities. Bacteriain the gingival space can also erode the cementum, which helps to hold the teeth in place. If not treated, erosion ofcementum can lead to the movement or loss of teeth. The bones of the jaw can even erode if the infection spreads. Thiscondition can be associated with bleeding and halitosis (bad breath). Cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene maybe sufficient to treat periodontitis. However, in cases of severe periodontitis, an antibiotic may be given. Antibioticsmay be given in pill form or applied directly to the gum (local treatment). Antibiotics given can include tetracycline,doxycycline, macrolides or β-lactams. Because periodontitis can be caused by a mix of microbes, a combination ofantibiotics may be given.Figure 24.10 (a) Healthy gums hold the teeth firmly and do not bleed. (b) Gingivitis is the first stage of periodontaldisease. Microbial infection causes gums to become inflamed and irritated, with occasional bleeding. (c) Inperiodontitis, gums recede and expose parts of the tooth normally covered. (d) In advanced periodontitis, the infectionspreads to ligaments and bone tissue supporting the teeth. Tooth loss may occur, or teeth may need to be surgicallyremoved. (credit: modification of work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)Trench MouthWhen certain bacteria, such as Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and Treponema vicentii, are involvedand periodontal disease progresses, acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth, also called Vincent'sdisease, can develop. This is severe periodontitis characterized by erosion of the gums, ulcers, substantial pain withchewing, and halitosis (Figure 24.11) that can be diagnosed by visual examination and X-rays. In countries withgood medical and dental care, it is most common in individuals with weakened immune systems, such as patientswith AIDS. In addition to cleaning and pain medication, patients may be prescribed antibiotics such as amoxicillin,Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1059amoxicillin clavulanate, clindamycin, or doxycycline.Figure 24.11 These inflamed, eroded gums are an example of a mild case of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis,also known as trench mouth. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• How does gingivitis progress to periodontitis?Healthy Mouth, Healthy BodyGood oral health promotes good overall health, and the reverse is also true. Poor oral health can lead todifficulty eating, which can cause malnutrition. Painful or loose teeth can also cause a person to avoid certainfoods or eat less. Malnutrition due to dental problems is of greatest concern for the elderly, for whom it canworsen other health conditions and contribute to mortality. Individuals who have serious illnesses, especiallyAIDS, are also at increased risk of malnutrition from dental problems.Additionally, poor oral health can contribute to the development of disease. Increased bacterial growth in themouth can cause inflammation and infection in other parts of the body. For example, Streptococcus in themouth, the main contributor to biofilms on teeth, tartar, and dental caries, can spread throughout the body whenthere is damage to the tissues inside the mouth, as can happen during dental work. S. mutans produces asurface adhesin known as P1, which binds to salivary agglutinin on the surface of the tooth. P1 can also bind toextracellular matrix proteins including fibronectin and collagen. When Streptococcus enters the bloodstream asa result of tooth brushing or dental cleaning, it causes inflammation that can lead to the accumulation of plaquein the arteries and contribute to the development of atherosclerosis, a condition associated with cardiovasculardisease, heart attack, and stroke. In some cases, bacteria that spread through the blood vessels can lodge inthe heart and cause endocarditis (an example of a focal infection).Micro Connections1060 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Oral InfectionsAs noted earlier, normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infections. However, there are number ofother infections that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbes are present.Herpetic GingivostomatitisAs described in Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes, infections by herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)frequently manifest as oral herpes, also called acute herpes labialis and characterized by cold sores on the lips,mouth, or gums. HSV-1 can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, a condition that results in ulcers of themucous membranes inside the mouth (Figure 24.12). Herpetic gingivostomatitis is normally self-limiting except inimmunocompromised patients. Like oral herpes, the infection is generally diagnosed through clinical examination,but cultures or biopsies may be obtained if other signs or symptoms suggest the possibility of a different causativeagent. If treatment is needed, mouthwashes or antiviral medications such as acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovirmay be used.Figure 24.12 (a) This cold sore is caused by infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). (b) HSV-1 can alsocause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. (credit b: modification of work by Klaus D. Peter)Oral ThrushThe yeast Candida is part of the normal human microbiota, but overgrowths, especially of Candida albicans, canlead to infections in several parts of the body. When Candida infection develops in the oral cavity, it is called oralthrush. Oral thrush is most common in infants because they do not yet have well developed immune systems andhave not acquired the robust normal microbiota that keeps Candida in check in adults. Oral thrush is also common inimmunodeficient patients and is a common infection in patients with AIDS.Oral thrush is characterized by the appearance of white patches and pseudomembranes in the mouth (Figure 24.13)and can be associated with bleeding. The infection may be treated topically with nystatin or clotrimazole oralsuspensions, although systemic treatment is sometimes needed. In serious cases, systemic azoles such as fluconazoleor itraconazole (for strains resistant to fluconazole), may be used. Amphotericin B can also be used if the infection issevere or if the Candida species is azole-resistant.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1061Figure 24.13 Overgrowth of Candida in the mouth is called thrush. It often appears as white patches. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)MumpsThe viral disease mumps is an infection of the parotid glands, the largest of the three pairs of salivary glands (Figure24.3). The causative agent is mumps virus (MuV), a paramyxovirus with an envelope that has hemagglutinin andneuraminidase spikes. A fusion protein located on the surface of the envelope helps to fuse the viral envelope to thehost cell plasma membrane.Mumps virus is transmitted through respiratory droplets or through contact with contaminated saliva, making it quitecontagious so that it can lead easily to epidemics. It causes fever, muscle pain, headache, pain with chewing, lossof appetite, fatigue, and weakness. There is swelling of the salivary glands and associated pain (Figure 24.14).The virus can enter the bloodstream (viremia), allowing it to spread to the organs and the central nervous system.The infection ranges from subclinical cases to cases with serious complications, such as encephalitis, meningitis, anddeafness. Inflammation of the pancreas, testes, ovaries, and breasts may also occur and cause permanent damage tothose organs; despite these complications, a mumps infection rarely cause sterility.Mumps can be recognized based on clinical signs and symptoms, and a diagnosis can be confirmed with laboratorytesting. The virus can be identified using culture or molecular techniques such as RT-PCR. Serologic tests are alsoavailable, especially enzyme immunoassays that detect antibodies. There is no specific treatment for mumps, sosupportive therapies are used. The most effective way to avoid infection is through vaccination. Although mumpsused to be a common childhood disease, it is now rare in the United States due to vaccination with the measles,mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine.1062 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.14 This child shows the characteristic parotid swelling associated with mumps. (credit: modification ofwork by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Compare and contrast the signs and symptoms of herpetic gingivostomatitis, oral thrush, and mumps.Oral InfectionsInfections of the mouth and oral cavity can be caused by a variety of pathogens, including bacteria, viruses,and fungi. Many of these infections only affect the mouth, but some can spread and become systemicinfections. Figure 24.15 summarizes the main characteristics of common oral infections.Disease ProfileChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1063Figure 24.151064 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.524.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the GI tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the GI tractA wide range of gastrointestinal diseases are caused by bacterial contamination of food. Recall that foodbornedisease can arise from either infection or intoxication. In both cases, bacterial toxins are typically responsible forproducing disease signs and symptoms. The distinction lies in where the toxins are produced. In an infection, themicrobial agent is ingested, colonizes the gut, and then produces toxins that damage host cells. In an intoxication,bacteria produce toxins in the food before it is ingested. In either case, the toxins cause damage to the cells lining thegastrointestinal tract, typically the colon. This leads to the common signs and symptoms of diarrhea or watery stooland abdominal cramps, or the more severe dysentery. Symptoms of foodborne diseases also often include nausea andvomiting, which are mechanisms the body uses to expel the toxic materials.Most bacterial gastrointestinal illness is short-lived and self-limiting; however, loss of fluids due to severe diarrhealillness can lead to dehydration that can, in some cases, be fatal without proper treatment. Oral rehydration therapywith electrolyte solutions is an essential aspect of treatment for most patients with GI disease, especially in childrenand infants.Staphylococcal Food PoisoningStaphylococcal food poisoning is one form of food intoxication. When Staphylococcus aureus grows in food, itmay produce enterotoxins that, when ingested, can cause symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, cramping, and vomitingwithin one to six hours. In some severe cases, it may cause headache, dehydration, and changes in blood pressureand heart rate. Signs and symptoms resolve within 24 to 48 hours. S. aureus is often associated with a variety of rawor undercooked and cooked foods including meat (e.g., canned meat, ham, and sausages) and dairy products (e.g.,cheeses, milk, and butter). It is also commonly found on hands and can be transmitted to prepared foods through poorhygiene, including poor handwashing and the use of contaminated food preparation surfaces, such as cutting boards.The greatest risk is for food left at a temperature below 60 °C (140 °F), which allows the bacteria to grow. Cookedfoods should generally be reheated to at least 60 °C (140 °F) for safety and most raw meats should be cooked to evenhigher internal temperatures (Figure 24.16).Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1065Figure 24.16 This figure indicates safe internal temperatures associated with the refrigeration, cooking, andreheating of different foods. Temperatures above refrigeration and below the minimum cooking temperature mayallow for microbial growth, increasing the likelihood of foodborne disease. (credit: modification of work by USDA)There are at least 21 Staphylococcal enterotoxins and Staphylococcal enterotoxin-like toxins that can cause foodintoxication. The enterotoxins are proteins that are resistant to low pH, allowing them to pass through the stomach.They are heat stable and are not destroyed by boiling at 100 °C. Even though the bacterium itself may be killed, theenterotoxins alone can cause vomiting and diarrhea, although the mechanisms are not fully understood. At least someof the symptoms may be caused by the enterotoxin functioning as a superantigen and provoking a strong immuneresponse by activating T cell proliferation.The rapid onset of signs and symptoms helps to diagnose this foodborne illness. Because the bacterium does not needto be present for the toxin to cause symptoms, diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the toxin in a food sample or inbiological specimens (feces or vomitus) from the patient. Serological techniques, including ELISA, can also be usedto identify the toxin in food samples.The condition generally resolves relatively quickly, within 24 hours, without treatment. In some cases, supportivetreatment in a hospital may be needed.• How can S. aureus cause food intoxication?Shigellosis (Bacillary Dysentery)When gastrointestinal illness is associated with the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium Shigella, it is calledbacillary dysentery, or shigellosis. Infections can be caused by S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, and/or S. sonneithat colonize the GI tract. Shigellosis can be spread from hand to mouth or through contaminated food and water.Most commonly, it is transmitted through the fecal-oral route.Shigella bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cells. When taken into a phagosome, they can escape and then live withinthe cytoplasm of the cell or move to adjacent cells. As the organisms multiply, the epithelium and structures with Mcells of the Peyer’s patches in the intestine may become ulcerated and cause loss of fluid. Stomach cramps, fever,and watery diarrhea that may also contain pus, mucus, and/or blood often develop. More severe cases may result inulceration of the mucosa, dehydration, and rectal bleeding. Additionally, patients may later develop hemolytic uremic1066 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5syndrome (HUS), a serious condition in which damaged blood cells build up in the kidneys and may cause kidneyfailure, or reactive arthritis, a condition in which arthritis develops in multiple joints following infection. Patients mayalso develop chronic post-infection irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).S. dysenteriae type 1 is able to produce Shiga toxin, which targets the endothelial cells of small blood vessels in thesmall and large intestine by binding to a glycosphingolipid. Once inside the endothelial cells, the toxin targets thelarge ribosomal subunit, thus affecting protein synthesis of these cells. Hemorrhaging and lesions in the colon canresult. The toxin can target the kidney’s glomerulus, the blood vessels where filtration of blood in the kidney begins,thus resulting in HUS.Stool samples, which should be processed promptly, are analyzed using serological or molecular techniques. Onecommon method is to perform immunoassays for S. dysenteriae. (Other methods that can be used to identify Shigellainclude API test strips, Enterotube systems, or PCR testing. The presence of white blood cells and blood in fecalsamples occurs in about 70% of patients[4] (Figure 24.17). Severe cases may require antibiotics such as ciprofloxacinand azithromycin, but these must be carefully prescribed because resistance is increasingly common.Figure 24.17 Red and white blood cells can be seen in this micrograph of a stool sample from a patient withshigellosis.• Compare and contrast Shigella infections and intoxications.SalmonellosisSalmonella gastroenteritis, also called salmonellosis, is caused by the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacteriumSalmonella. Two species, S. enterica and S. bongori, cause disease in humans, but S. enterica is the most common.The most common serotypes of S. enterica are Enteritidis and Typhi. We will discuss typhoid fever caused byserotypes Typhi and Paratyphi A separately. Here, we will focus on salmonellosis caused by other serotypes.Salmonella is a part of the normal intestinal microbiota of many individuals. However, salmonellosis is caused byexogenous agents, and infection can occur depending on the serotype, size of the inoculum, and overall health of the4. Jaya Sureshbabu. “Shigella Infection Workup.” Medscape. Updated Jun 28, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/968773-workup.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1067host. Infection is caused by ingestion of contaminated food, handling of eggshells, or exposure to certain animals.Salmonella is part of poultry’s microbiota, so exposure to raw eggs and raw poultry can increase the risk of infection.Handwashing and cooking foods thoroughly greatly reduce the risk of transmission. Salmonella bacteria can survivefreezing for extended periods but cannot survive high temperatures.Once the bacteria are ingested, they multiply within the intestines and penetrate the epithelial mucosal cells via Mcells where they continue to grow (Figure 24.18). They trigger inflammatory processes and the hypersecretionof fluids. Once inside the body, they can persist inside the phagosomes of macrophages. Salmonella can cross theepithelial cell membrane and enter the bloodstream and lymphatic system. Some strains of Salmonella also producean enterotoxin that can cause an intoxication.Infected individuals develop fever, nausea, abdominal cramps, vomiting, headache, and diarrhea. These signs andsymptoms generally last a few days to a week. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),there are 1,000,000 cases annually, with 380 deaths each year.[5] However, because the disease is usually self-limiting,many cases are not reported to doctors and the overall incidence may be underreported. Diagnosis involves culturefollowed by serotyping and DNA fingerprinting if needed. Positive results are reported to the CDC. When an unusualserotype is detected, samples are sent to the CDC for further analysis. Serotyping is important for determiningtreatment. Oral rehydration therapy is commonly used. Antibiotics are only recommended for serious cases. Whenantibiotics are needed, as in immunocompromised patients, fluoroquinolones, third-generation cephalosporins, andampicillin are recommended. Antibiotic resistance is a serious concern.Figure 24.18 Salmonella entering an intestinal epithelial cell by reorganizing the host cell’s cytoskeleton via thetrigger mechanism. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes for Health)Typhoid FeverCertain serotypes of S. enterica, primarily serotype Typhi (S. typhi) but also Paratyphi, cause a more severe type ofsalmonellosis called typhoid fever. This serious illness, which has an untreated mortality rate of 10%, causes highfever, body aches, headache, nausea, lethargy, and a possible rash.Some individuals carry S. typhi without presenting signs or symptoms (known as asymptomatic carriers) andcontinually shed them through their feces. These carriers often have the bacteria in the gallbladder or intestinalepithelium. Individuals consuming food or water contaminated with these feces can become infected.S. typhi penetrate the intestinal mucosa, grow within the macrophages, and are transported through the body, most5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Salmonella. Updated August 25, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella.1068 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5notably to the liver and gallbladder. Eventually, the macrophages lyse, releasing S. typhi into the bloodstreamand lymphatic system. Mortality can result from ulceration and perforation of the intestine. A wide range ofcomplications, such as pneumonia and jaundice, can occur with disseminated disease.S. typhi have Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs) that contain the genes for many of their virulence factors. Twoexamples of important typhoid toxins are the Vi antigen, which encodes for capsule production, and chimeric A2B5toxin, which causes many of the signs and symptoms of the acute phase of typhoid fever.Clinical examination and culture are used to make the diagnosis. The bacteria can be cultured from feces, urine, blood,or bone marrow. Serology, including ELISA, is used to identify the most pathogenic strains, but confirmation withDNA testing or culture is needed. A PCR test can also be used, but is not widely available.The recommended antibiotic treatment involves fluoroquinolones, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin. Individuals must beextremely careful to avoid infecting others during treatment. Typhoid fever can be prevented through vaccination forindividuals traveling to parts of the world where it is common.• Why is serotyping particularly important in Salmonella infections and typhoid fever?Typhoid MaryMary Mallon was an Irish immigrant who worked as a cook in New York in the early 20th century. Over sevenyears, from 1900 to 1907, Mallon worked for a number of different households, unknowingly spreading illnessto the people who lived in each one. In 1906, one family hired George Soper, an expert in typhoid feverepidemics, to determine the cause of the illnesses in their household. Eventually, Soper tracked Mallon downand directly linked 22 cases of typhoid fever to her. He discovered that Mallon was a carrier for typhoid butwas immune to it herself. Although active carriers had been recognized before, this was the first time that anasymptomatic carrier of infection had been identified.Because she herself had never been ill, Mallon found it difficult to believe she could be the source of the illness.She fled from Soper and the authorities because she did not want to be quarantined or forced to give up herprofession, which was relatively well paid for someone with her background. However, Mallon was eventuallycaught and kept in an isolation facility in the Bronx, where she remained until 1910, when the New York healthdepartment released her under the condition that she never again work with food. Unfortunately, Mallon didnot comply, and she soon began working as a cook again. After new cases began to appear that resulted inthe death of two individuals, the authorities tracked her down again and returned her to isolation, where sheremained for 23 more years until her death in 1938. Epidemiologists were able to trace 51 cases of typhoidfever and three deaths directly to Mallon, who is unflatteringly remembered as “Typhoid Mary.”The Typhoid Mary case has direct correlations in the health-care industry. Consider Kaci Hickox, an Americannurse who treated Ebola patients in West Africa during the 2014 epidemic. After returning to the United States,Hickox was quarantined against her will for three days and later found not to have Ebola. Hickox vehementlyopposed the quarantine. In an editorial published in the British newspaper The Guardian,[6] Hickox arguedthat quarantining asymptomatic health-care workers who had not tested positive for a disease would not onlyprevent such individuals from practicing their profession, but discourage others from volunteering to work indisease-ridden areas where health-care workers are desperately needed.Eye on EthicsChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1069What is the responsibility of an individual like Mary Mallon to change her behavior to protect others? Whathappens when an individual believes that she is not a risk, but others believe that she is? How would youreact if you were in Mallon’s shoes and were placed in a quarantine you did not believe was necessary, at theexpense of your own freedom and possibly your career? Would it matter if you were definitely infected or not?E. coli InfectionsThe gram-negative rod Escherichia coli is a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon. Although thevast majority of E. coli strains are helpful commensal bacteria, some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerousdiarrheal disease. The pathogenic strains have additional virulence factors such as type 1 fimbriae that promotecolonization of the colon or may produce toxins (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens).These virulence factors are acquired through horizontal gene transfer.Extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract. Although these bacteria can bespread from person to person, they are often acquired through contaminated food or water. There are six recognizedpathogenic groups of E. coli, but we will focus here on the four that are most commonly transmitted through food andwater.Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), also known as traveler’s diarrhea, causes diarrheal illness and is commonin less developed countries. In Mexico, ETEC infection is called Montezuma’s Revenge. Following ingestion ofcontaminated food or water, infected individuals develop a watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, malaise (a feelingof being unwell), and a low fever. ETEC produces a heat-stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin, and adhesinscalled colonization factors that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall. Some strains of ETEC also produceheat-labile toxins. The disease is usually relatively mild and self-limiting. Diagnosis involves culturing and PCR.If needed, antibiotic treatment with fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, rifaximin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole(TMP/SMZ) may shorten infection duration. However, antibiotic resistance is a problem.Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) is very similar to shigellosis, including its pathogenesis of intracellular invasion intointestinal epithelial tissue. This bacterium carries a large plasmid that is involved in epithelial cell penetration. Theillness is usually self-limiting, with symptoms including watery diarrhea, chills, cramps, malaise, fever, and dysentery.Culturing and PCR testing can be used for diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment is not recommended, so supportive therapyis used if needed.Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea, especially in infants and those in lessdeveloped countries. Fever, vomiting, and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration. These E. coli inject a protein (Tir)that attaches to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cells and triggers rearrangement of host cell actin from microvillito pedestals. Tir also happens to be the receptor for Intimin, a surface protein produced by EPEC, thereby allowing E.coli to “sit” on the pedestal. The genes necessary for this pedestal formation are encoded on the locus for enterocyteeffacement (LEE) pathogenicity island. As with ETEC, diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. Treatment is similar tothat for ETEC.The most dangerous strains are enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which are the strains capable of causingepidemics. In particular, the strain O157:H7 has been responsible for several recent outbreaks. Recall that the Oand H refer to surface antigens that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response (“O” refers tothe O-side chain of the lipopolysaccharide and the “H” refers to the flagella). Similar to EPEC, EHEC also formspedestals. EHEC also produces a Shiga-like toxin. Because the genome of this bacterium has been sequenced, it isknown that the Shiga toxin genes were most likely acquired through transduction (horizontal gene transfer). The Shigatoxin genes originated from Shigella dysenteriae. Prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infected Shigellaintegrated into the chromosome of E. coli. The Shiga-like toxin is often called verotoxin.6. Kaci Hickox. “Stop Calling Me the ‘Ebola Nurse.’” The Guardian. November 17, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/17/stop-calling-me-ebola-nurse-kaci-hickox.1070 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5EHEC can cause disease ranging from relatively mild to life-threatening. Symptoms include bloody diarrhea withsevere cramping, but no fever. Although it is often self-limiting, it can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profusebleeding. One possible complication is HUS. Diagnosis involves culture, often using MacConkey with sorbitol agarto differentiate between E. coli O157:H7, which does not ferment sorbitol, and other less virulent strains of E. colithat can ferment sorbitol.Serological typing or PCR testing also can be used, as well as genetic testing for Shiga toxin. To distinguish EPECfrom EHEC, because they both form pedestals on intestinal epithelial cells, it is necessary to test for genes encodingfor both the Shiga-like toxin and for the LEE. Both EPEC and EHEC have LEE, but EPEC lacks the gene for Shigatoxin. Antibiotic therapy is not recommended and may worsen HUS because of the toxins released when the bacteriaare killed, so supportive therapies must be used. Table 24.1 summarizes the characteristics of the four most commonpathogenic groups.Some Pathogenic Groups of E. coliGroup VirulenceFactors andGenesSigns andSymptomsDiagnostic Tests TreatmentEnterotoxigenic E.coli (ETEC)Heat stableenterotoxinsimilar tocholera toxinRelativelymild, waterydiarrheaCulturing, PCR Self-limiting; ifneeded,fluoroquinolones,doxycycline,rifaximin, TMP/SMZ;antibiotic resistanceis a problemEnteroinvasive E.coli (EIEC)Inv (invasiveplasmid)genesRelativelymild, waterydiarrhea;dysentery orinflammatorycolitis mayoccurCulturing, PCR; testing forinv gene; additional assaysto distinguish from ShigellaSupportive therapyonly; antibiotics notrecommendedEnteropathogenicE. coli (EPEC)Locus ofenterocyteeffacement(LEE)pathogenicityislandSevere fever,vomiting,nonbloodydiarrhea,dehydration;potentiallyfatalCulturing, PCR; detection ofLEE lacking Shiga-like toxingenesSelf-limiting; ifneeded,fluoroquinolones,doxycycline, rifaximin(TMP/SMZ);antibiotic resistanceis a problemEnterohemorrhagicE. coli (EHEC)Verotoxin May be mildor verysevere;bloodydiarrhea; mayresult in HUSCulturing; plate onMacConkey agar withsorbitol agar as it does notferment sorbitol; PCRdetection of LEE containingShiga-like toxin genesAntibiotics are notrecommended due tothe risk of HUSTable 24.1• Compare and contrast the virulence factors and signs and symptoms of infections with the four main E. coligroups.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1071Cholera and Other VibriosThe gastrointestinal disease cholera is a serious infection often associated with poor sanitation, especially followingnatural disasters, because it is spread through contaminated water and food that has not been heated to temperatureshigh enough to kill the bacteria. It is caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1, a gram-negative, flagellated bacteriumin the shape of a curved rod (vibrio). According to the CDC, cholera causes an estimated 3 to 5 million cases and100,000 deaths each year.[7]Because V. cholerae is killed by stomach acid, relatively large doses are needed for a few microbial cells to survive toreach the intestines and cause infection. The motile cells travel through the mucous layer of the intestines, where theyattach to epithelial cells and release cholera enterotoxin. The toxin is an A-B toxin with activity through adenylatecyclase (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). Within the intestinal cell, cyclic AMP(cAMP) levels increase, which activates a chloride channel and results in the release of ions into the intestinal lumen.This increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen leads to water also entering the lumen. As the water and electrolytesleave the body, it causes rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Diarrhea is so profuse that it is often called“rice water stool,” and patients are placed on cots with a hole in them to monitor the fluid loss (Figure 24.19).Cholera is diagnosed by taking a stool sample and culturing for Vibrio. The bacteria are oxidase positive and shownon-lactose fermentation on MacConkey agar. Gram-negative lactose fermenters will produce red colonies whilenon-fermenters will produce white/colorless colonies. Gram-positive bacteria will not grow on MacConkey. Lactosefermentation is commonly used for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferments lactosewhile pathogens do not. V. cholerae may also be cultured on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose (TCBS) agar, aselective and differential media for Vibrio spp., which produce a distinct yellow colony.Cholera may be self-limiting and treatment involves rehydration and electrolyte replenishment. Although antibioticsare not typically needed, they can be used for severe or disseminated disease. Tetracyclines are recommended, butdoxycycline, erythromycin, orfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and TMP/SMZ may be used. Recent evidence suggests thatazithromycin is also a good first-line antibiotic. Good sanitation—including appropriate sewage treatment, cleansupplies for cooking, and purified drinking water—is important to prevent infection (Figure 24.19)Figure 24.19 (a) Outbreaks of cholera often occur in areas with poor sanitation or after natural disasters thatcompromise sanitation infrastructure. (b) At a cholera treatment center in Haiti, patients are receiving intravenousfluids to combat the dehydrating effects of this disease. They often lie on a cot with a hole in it and a bucketunderneath to allow for monitoring of fluid loss. (c) This scanning electron micrograph shows Vibrio cholera. (credit a,b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Janice Carr,Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)V. cholera is not the only Vibrio species that can cause disease. V. parahemolyticus is associated with consumption ofcontaminated seafood and causes gastrointestinal illness with signs and symptoms such as watery diarrhea, nausea,fever, chills, and abdominal cramps. The bacteria produce a heat-stable hemolysin, leading to dysentery and possibledisseminated disease. It also sometimes causes wound infections. V. parahemolyticus is diagnosed using cultures from7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cholera—Vibrio cholerae Infection. Updated November 6, 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/cholera/general. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.1072 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5blood, stool, or a wound. As with V. cholera, selective medium (especially TCBS agar) works well. Tetracycline andciprofloxacin can be used to treat severe cases, but antibiotics generally are not needed.Vibrio vulnificus is found in warm seawater and, unlike V. cholerae, is not associated with poor sanitary conditions.The bacteria can be found in raw seafood, and ingestion causes gastrointestinal illness. It can also be acquired byindividuals with open skin wounds who are exposed to water with high concentrations of the pathogen. In somecases, the infection spreads to the bloodstream and causes septicemia. Skin infection can lead to edema, ecchymosis(discoloration of skin due to bleeding), and abscesses. Patients with underlying disease have a high fatality rate ofabout 50%. It is of particular concern for individuals with chronic liver disease or who are otherwise immunodeficientbecause a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from developing. V. vulnificus is diagnosed by culturingfor the pathogen from stool samples, blood samples, or skin abscesses. Adult patients are treated with doxycyclinecombined with a third generation cephalosporin or with fluoroquinolones, and children are treated with TMP/SMZ.Two other vibrios, Aeromonas hydrophila and Plesiomonas shigelloides, are also associated with marineenvironments and raw seafood; they can also cause gastroenteritis. Like V. vulnificus, A. hydrophila is more oftenassociated with infections in wounds, generally those acquired in water. In some cases, it can also cause septicemia.Other species of Aeromonas can cause illness. P. shigelloides is sometimes associated with more serious systemicinfections if ingested in contaminated food or water. Culture can be used to diagnose A. hydrophila and P. shigelloidesinfections, for which antibiotic therapy is generally not needed. When necessary, tetracycline and ciprofloxacin,among other antibiotics, may be used for treatment of A. hydrophila, and fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim are theeffective treatments for P. shigelloides.• How does V. cholera infection cause rapid dehydration?Campylobacter jejuni GastroenteritisCampylobacter is a genus of gram-negative, spiral or curved bacteria. They may have one or two flagella.Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis, a form of campylobacteriosis, is a widespread illness that is caused byCampylobacter jejuni. The primary route of transmission is through poultry that becomes contaminated duringslaughter. Handling of the raw chicken in turn contaminates cooking surfaces, utensils, and other foods.Unpasteurized milk or contaminated water are also potential vehicles of transmission. In most cases, the illnessis self-limiting and includes fever, diarrhea, cramps, vomiting, and sometimes dysentery. More serious signs andsymptoms, such as bacteremia, meningitis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and hepatitis, sometimes occur. It has also beenassociated with autoimmune conditions such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, a neurological disease that occurs aftersome infections and results in temporary paralysis. HUS following infection can also occur. The virulence in manystrains is the result of hemolysin production and the presence of Campylobacter cytolethal distending toxin (CDT), apowerful deoxyribonuclease (DNase) that irreversibly damages host cell DNA.Diagnosis involves culture under special conditions, such as elevated temperature, low oxygen tension, and oftenmedium supplemented with antimicrobial agents. These bacteria should be cultured on selective medium (suchas Campy CV, charcoal selective medium, or cefaperazone charcoal deoxycholate agar) and incubated undermicroaerophilic conditions for at least 72 hours at 42 °C. Antibiotic treatment is not usually needed, but erythromycinor ciprofloxacin may be used.Peptic UlcersThe gram-negative bacterium Helicobacter pylori is able to tolerate the acidic environment of the human stomach andhas been shown to be a major cause of peptic ulcers, which are ulcers of the stomach or duodenum. The bacteriumis also associated with increased risk of stomach cancer (Figure 24.20). According to the CDC, approximately twothirdsof the population is infected with H. pylori, but less than 20% have a risk of developing ulcers or stomachChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1073cancer. H. pylori is found in approximately 80% of stomach ulcers and in over 90% of duodenal ulcers.[8]H. pylori colonizes epithelial cells in the stomach using pili for adhesion. These bacteria produce urease, whichstimulates an immune response and creates ammonia that neutralizes stomach acids to provide a more hospitablemicroenvironment. The infection damages the cells of the stomach lining, including those that normally produce theprotective mucus that serves as a barrier between the tissue and stomach acid. As a result, inflammation (gastritis)occurs and ulcers may slowly develop. Ulcer formation can also be caused by toxin activity. It has been reported that50% of clinical isolates of H. pylori have detectable levels of exotoxin activity in vitro.[9] This toxin, VacA, inducesvacuole formation in host cells. VacA has no primary sequence homology with other bacterial toxins, and in a mousemodel, there is a correlation between the presence of the toxin gene, the activity of the toxin, and gastric epithelialtissue damage.Signs and symptoms include nausea, lack of appetite, bloating, burping, and weight loss. Bleeding ulcers may producedark stools. If no treatment is provided, the ulcers can become deeper, more tissues can be involved, and stomachperforation can occur. Because perforation allows digestive enzymes and acid to leak into the body, it is a very seriouscondition.8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Helicobacter pylori: Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers.” Updated July 1998.http://www.cdc.gov/ulcer/files/hpfacts.pdf.9. T. L. Cover. “The Vacuolating Cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori.” Molecular Microbiology 20 (1996) 2: pp. 241–246.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8733223.1074 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.20 Helicobacter infection decreases mucus production and causes peptic ulcers. (credit top left photo:modification of work by "Santhosh Thomas"/YouTube; credit top right photo: modification of work by Moriya M,Uehara A, Okumura T, Miyamoto M, and Kohgo Y)To diagnose H. pylori infection, multiple methods are available. In a breath test, the patient swallows radiolabeledurea. If H. pylori is present, the bacteria will produce urease to break down the urea. This reaction producesradiolabeled carbon dioxide that can be detected in the patient’s breath. Blood testing can also be used to detectantibodies to H. pylori. The bacteria themselves can be detected using either a stool test or a stomach wall biopsy.Antibiotics can be used to treat the infection. However, unique to H. pylori, the recommendation from the USFood and Drug Administration is to use a triple therapy. The current protocols are 10 days of treatment withomeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (OAC); 14 days of treatment with bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole,and tetracycline (BMT); or 10 or 14 days of treatment with lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (LAC).Omeprazole, bismuth subsalicylate, and lansoprazole are not antibiotics but are instead used to decrease acid levelsbecause H. pylori prefers acidic environments.Although treatment is often valuable, there are also risks to H. pylori eradication. Infection with H. pylori mayChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1075actually protect against some cancers, such as esophageal adenocarcinoma and gastroesophageal reflux disease.[10][11]• How does H. pylori cause peptic ulcers?Clostridium perfringens GastroenteritisClostridium perfringens gastroenteritis is a generally mild foodborne disease that is associated with undercookedmeats and other foods. C. perfringens is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, endospore-forming anaerobic bacterium thatis tolerant of high and low temperatures. At high temperatures, the bacteria can form endospores that will germinaterapidly in foods or within the intestine. Food poisoning by type A strains is common. This strain always producesan enterotoxin, sometimes also present in other strains, that causes the clinical symptoms of cramps and diarrhea.A more severe form of the illness, called pig-bel or enteritis necroticans, causes hemorrhaging, pain, vomiting, andbloating. Gangrene of the intestines may result. This form has a high mortality rate but is rare in the United States.Diagnosis involves detecting the C. perfringens toxin in stool samples using either molecular biology techniques(PCR detection of the toxin gene) or immunology techniques (ELISA). The bacteria itself may also be detected infoods or in fecal samples. Treatment includes rehydration therapy, electrolyte replacement, and intravenous fluids.Antibiotics are not recommended because they can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut, and there areconcerns about antibiotic resistance. The illness can be prevented through proper handling and cooking of foods,including prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperatures and cooking food to a sufficiently high temperature.Clostridium difficileClostridium difficile is a gram-positive rod that can be a commensal bacterium as part of the normal microbiota ofhealthy individuals. When the normal microbiota is disrupted by long-term antibiotic use, it can allow the overgrowthof this bacterium, resulting in antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by C. difficile. Antibiotic-associated diarrheacan also be considered a nosocomial disease. Patients at the greatest risk of C. difficile infection are those whoare immunocompromised, have been in health-care settings for extended periods, are older, have recently takenantibiotics, have had gastrointestinal procedures done, or use proton pump inhibitors, which reduce stomach acidityand allow proliferation of C. difficile. Because this species can form endospores, it can survive for extended periodsof time in the environment under harsh conditions and is a considerable concern in health-care settings.This bacterium produces two toxins, Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) and Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB).These toxins inactivate small GTP-binding proteins, resulting in actin condensation and cell rounding, followedby cell death. Infections begin with focal necrosis, then ulceration with exudate, and can progress topseudomembranous colitis, which involves inflammation of the colon and the development of a pseudomembraneof fibrin containing dead epithelial cells and leukocytes (Figure 24.21). Watery diarrhea, dehydration, fever, loss ofappetite, and abdominal pain can result. Perforation of the colon can occur, leading to septicemia, shock, and death. C.difficile is also associated with necrotizing enterocolitis in premature babies and neutropenic enterocolitis associatedwith cancer therapies.10. Martin J. Blaser. “Disappearing Microbiota: Helicobacter pylori Protection against Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.” Cancer PreventionResearch 1 (2008) 5: pp. 308–311. http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/1/5/308.full.pdf+html.11. Ivan F. N. Hung and Benjamin C. Y. Wong. “Assessing the Risks and Benefits of Treating Helicobacter pylori Infection.” TherapeuticAdvances in Gastroenterology 2 (2009) 3: pp, 141–147. doi: 10.1177/1756283X08100279.1076 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.21 Clostridium difficile is able to colonize the mucous membrane of the colon when the normal microbiotais disrupted. The toxins TcdA and TcdB trigger an immune response, with neutrophils and monocytes migrating fromthe bloodstream to the site of infection. Over time, inflammation and dead cells contribute to the development of apseudomembrane. (credit micrograph: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Diagnosis is made by considering the patient history (such as exposure to antibiotics), clinical presentation, imaging,endoscopy, lab tests, and other available data. Detecting the toxin in stool samples is used to confirm diagnosis.Although culture is preferred, it is rarely practical in clinical practice because the bacterium is an obligate anaerobe.Nucleic acid amplification tests, including PCR, are considered preferable to ELISA testing for molecular analysis.The first step of conventional treatment is to stop antibiotic use, and then to provide supportive therapy withelectrolyte replacement and fluids. Metronidazole is the preferred treatment if the C. difficile diagnosis has beenconfirmed. Vancomycin can also be used, but it should be reserved for patients for whom metronidazole wasineffective or who meet other criteria (e.g., under 10 years of age, pregnant, or allergic to metronidazole).Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1077A newer approach to treatment, known as a fecal transplant, focuses on restoring the microbiota of the gut in orderto combat the infection. In this procedure, a healthy individual donates a stool sample, which is mixed with salineand transplanted to the recipient via colonoscopy, endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or enema. It has been reported that thisprocedure has greater than 90% success in resolving C. difficile infections.[12]• How does antibiotic use lead to C. difficile infections?Foodborne Illness Due to Bacillus cereusBacillus cereus, commonly found in soil, is a gram-positive endospore-forming bacterium that can sometimes causefoodborne illness. B. cereus endospores can survive cooking and produce enterotoxins in food after it has been heated;illnesses often occur after eating rice and other prepared foods left at room temperature for too long. The signs andsymptoms appear within a few hours of ingestion and include nausea, pain, and abdominal cramps. B. cereus producestwo toxins: one causing diarrhea, and the other causing vomiting. More severe signs and symptoms can sometimesdevelop.Diagnosis can be accomplished by isolating bacteria from stool samples or vomitus and uneaten infected food.Treatment involves rehydration and supportive therapy. Antibiotics are not typically needed, as the illness is usuallyrelatively mild and is due to toxin activity.Foodborne Illness Due to YersiniaThe genus Yersinia is best known for Yersinia pestis, a gram-negative rod that causes the plague. However, Y.enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause gastroenteritis. The infection is generally transmitted through thefecal-oral route, with ingestion of food or water that has been contaminated by feces. Intoxication can also resultbecause of the activity of its endotoxin and exotoxins (enterotoxin and cytotoxin necrotizing factor). The illnessis normally relatively mild and self-limiting. However, severe diarrhea and dysentery can develop in infants. Inadults, the infection can spread and cause complications such as reactive arthritis, thyroid disorders, endocarditis,glomerulonephritis, eye inflammation, and/or erythema nodosum. Bacteremia may develop in rare cases.Diagnosis is generally made by detecting the bacteria in stool samples. Samples may also be obtained from othertissues or body fluids. Treatment is usually supportive, including rehydration, without antibiotics. If bacteremiaor other systemic disease is present, then antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, doxycycline, andtrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be used. Recovery can take up to two weeks.• Compare and contrast foodborne illnesses due to B. cereus and Yersinia.12. Faith Rohlke and Neil Stollman. “Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Relapsing Clostridium difficile Infection,” Therapeutic Advancesin Gastroenterology 5 (2012) 6: 403–420. doi: 10.1177/1756283X12453637.1078 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractBacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract generally occur when bacteria or bacterial toxins are ingestedin contaminated food or water. Toxins and other virulence factors can produce gastrointestinal inflammationand general symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting. Bacterial GI infections can vary widely in terms ofseverity and treatment. Some can be treated with antibiotics, but in other cases antibiotics may be ineffectivein combating toxins or even counterproductive if they compromise the GI microbiota. Figure 24.22 and Figure24.23 the key features of common bacterial GI infections.Disease ProfileChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1079Figure 24.221080 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.23Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1081Part 2At the hospital, Carli’s doctor began to think about possible causes of her severe gastrointestinal distress. Onepossibility was food poisoning, but no one else in her family was sick. The doctor asked about what Carli hadeaten the previous day; her mother mentioned that she’d had eggs for lunch, and that they may have beena little undercooked. The doctor took a sample of Carli’s stool and sent it for laboratory testing as part of herworkup. She suspected that Carli could have a case of bacterial or viral gastroenteritis, but she needed toknow the cause in order to prescribe an appropriate treatment.In the laboratory, technicians microscopically identified gram-negative bacilli in Carli’s stool sample. They alsoestablished a pure culture of the bacteria and analyzed it for antigens. This testing showed that the causativeagent was Salmonella.• What should the doctor do now to treat Carli?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the GI tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the GI tract and liverIn the developing world, acute viral gastroenteritis is devastating and a leading cause of death for children.[13]Worldwide, diarrhea is the second leading cause of mortality for children under age five, and 70% of childhoodgastroenteritis is viral.[14] As discussed, there are a number of bacteria responsible for diarrhea, but viruses can alsocause diarrhea. E. coli and rotavirus are the most common causative agents in the developing world. In this section,we will discuss rotaviruses and other, less common viruses that can also cause gastrointestinal illnesses.Gastroenteritis Caused by RotavirusesRotaviruses are double-stranded RNA viruses in the family Reoviridae. They are responsible for common diarrhealillness, although prevention through vaccination is becoming more common. The virus is primarily spread by thefecal-oral route (Figure 24.24).Clinical Focus13. Caleb K. King, Roger Glass, Joseph S. Bresee, Christopher Duggan. “Managing Acute Gastroenteritis Among Children: OralRehydration, Maintenance, and Nutritional Therapy.” MMWR 52 (2003) RR16: pp. 1–16. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5216a1.htm.14. Elizabeth Jane Elliott. “Acute Gastroenteritis in Children.” British Medical Journal 334 (2007) 7583: 35–40, doi: 10.1136/bmj.39036.406169.80; S. Ramani and G. Kang. “Viruses Causing Diarrhoea in the Developing World.” Current Opinions in InfectiousDiseases 22 (2009) 5: pp. 477–482. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328330662f; Michael Vincent F Tablang. “Viral Gastroenteritis.” Medscape.http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/176515-overview.1082 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.24 Rotaviruses in a fecal sample are visualized using electron microscopy. (credit: Dr. Graham Beards)These viruses are widespread in children, especially in day-care centers. The CDC estimates that 95% of children inthe United States have had at least one rotavirus infection by the time they reach age five.[15] Due to the memory ofthe body’s immune system, adults who come into contact with rotavirus will not contract the infection or, if they do,are asymptomatic. The elderly, however, are vulnerable to rotavirus infection due to weakening of the immune systemwith age, so infections can spread through nursing homes and similar facilities. In these cases, the infection may betransmitted from a family member who may have subclinical or clinical disease. The virus can also be transmittedfrom contaminated surfaces, on which it can survive for some time.Infected individuals exhibit fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The virus can survive in the stomach following a meal,but is normally found in the small intestines, particularly the epithelial cells on the villi. Infection can cause foodintolerance, especially with respect to lactose. The illness generally appears after an incubation period of about twodays and lasts for approximately one week (three to eight days). Without supportive treatment, the illness can causesevere fluid loss, dehydration, and even death. Even with milder illness, repeated infections can potentially lead tomalnutrition, especially in developing countries, where rotavirus infection is common due to poor sanitation and lackof access to clean drinking water. Patients (especially children) who are malnourished after an episode of diarrhea aremore susceptible to future diarrheal illness, increasing their risk of death from rotavirus infection.The most common clinical tool for diagnosis is enzyme immunoassay, which detects the virus from fecal samples.Latex agglutination assays are also used. Additionally, the virus can be detected using electron microscopy and RTPCR.Treatment is supportive with oral rehydration therapy. Preventive vaccination is also available. In the United States,rotavirus vaccines are part of the standard vaccine schedule and administration follows the guidelines of the WorldHealth Organization (WHO). The WHO recommends that all infants worldwide receive the rotavirus vaccine, the firstdose between six and 15 weeks of age and the second before 32 weeks.[16]Gastroenteritis Caused by NorovirusesNoroviruses, commonly identified as Norwalk viruses, are caliciviruses. Several strains can cause gastroenteritis.There are millions of cases a year, predominately in infants, young children, and the elderly. These viruses areeasily transmitted and highly contagious. They are known for causing widespread infections in groups of people inconfined spaces, such as on cruise ships. The viruses can be transmitted through direct contact, through touching15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Rotavirus,” The Pink Book. Updated September 8, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/rota.html.16. World Health Organization. “Rotavirus.” Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals. Updated April 21, 2010. http://www.who.int/immunization/topics/rotavirus/en/.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1083contaminated surfaces, and through contaminated food. Because the virus is not killed by disinfectants used atstandard concentrations for killing bacteria, the risk of transmission remains high, even after cleaning.The signs and symptoms of norovirus infection are similar to those for rotavirus, with watery diarrhea, mild cramps,and fever. Additionally, these viruses sometimes cause projectile vomiting. The illness is usually relatively mild,develops 12 to 48 hours after exposure, and clears within a couple of days without treatment. However, dehydrationmay occur.Norovirus can be detected using PCR or enzyme immunoassay (EIA) testing. RT-qPCR is the preferred approachas EIA is insufficiently sensitive. If EIA is used for rapid testing, diagnosis should be confirmed using PCR. Nomedications are available, but the illness is usually self-limiting. Rehydration therapy and electrolyte replacementmay be used. Good hygiene, hand washing, and careful food preparation reduce the risk of infection.Gastroenteritis Caused by AstrovirusesAstroviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses (family Astroviridae) that can cause severe gastroenteritis, especiallyin infants and children. Signs and symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, abdominal pain, headache,and malaise. The viruses are transmitted through the fecal-oral route (contaminated food or water). For diagnosis,stool samples are analyzed. Testing may involve enzyme immunoassays and immune electron microscopy. Treatmentinvolves supportive rehydration and electrolyte replacement if needed.• Why are rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses more common in children?Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractA number of viruses can cause gastroenteritis, characterized by inflammation of the GI tract and other signsand symptoms with a range of severities. As with bacterial GI infections, some cases can be relativelymild and self-limiting, while others can become serious and require intensive treatment. Antimicrobial drugsare generally not used to treat viral gastroenteritis; generally, these illnesses can be treated effectively withrehydration therapy to replace fluids lost in bouts of diarrhea and vomiting. Because most viral causes ofgastroenteritis are quite contagious, the best preventive measures involve avoiding and/or isolating infectedindividuals and limiting transmission through good hygiene and sanitation.Disease Profile1084 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.25HepatitisHepatitis is a general term meaning inflammation of the liver, which can have a variety of causes. In some cases, thecause is viral infection. There are five main hepatitis viruses that are clinically significant: hepatitisviruses A (HAV),B (HBV), C (HCV), D, (HDV) and E (HEV) (Figure 24.26). Note that other viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus(EBV), yellow fever, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) can also cause hepatitis and are discussed in Viral Infections ofthe Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems.Figure 24.26 Five main types of viruses cause hepatitis. HAV is a non-enveloped ssRNA(+) virus and is a memberof the picornavirus family (Baltimore Group IV). HBV is a dsDNA enveloped virus, replicates using reversetranscriptase, and is a member of the hepadnavirus family (Baltimore Group VII). HCV is an enveloped ssRNA(+)virus and is a member of the flavivirus family (Baltimore Group IV). HDV is an enveloped ssRNA(–) that is circular(Baltimore Group V). This virus can only propagate in the presence of HBV. HEV is a non-enveloped ssRNA(+) virusand a member of the hepeviridae family (Baltimore Group IV).Although the five hepatitis viruses differ, they can cause some similar signs and symptoms because they all have anaffinity for hepatocytes (liver cells). HAV and HEV can be contracted through ingestion while HBV, HCV, and HDVare transmitted by parenteral contact. It is possible for individuals to become long term or chronic carriers of hepatitisviruses.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1085The virus enters the blood (viremia), spreading to the spleen, the kidneys, and the liver. During viral replication, thevirus infects hepatocytes. The inflammation is caused by the hepatocytes replicating and releasing more hepatitisvirus. Signs and symptoms include malaise, anorexia, loss of appetite, dark urine, pain in the upper right quadrantof the abdomen, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, joint pain, and gray stool. Additionally, when the liver is diseased orinjured, it is unable to break down hemoglobin effectively, and bilirubin can build up in the body, giving the skin andmucous membranes a yellowish color, a condition called jaundice (Figure 24.27). In severe cases, death from livernecrosis may occur.Figure 24.27 (a) Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver resulting from a variety of root causes. It can cause jaundice.(b) Jaundice is characterized by yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and sclera of the eyes. (credit b left:modification of work by James Heilman, MD; credit b right: modification of work by “Sab3el3eish”/WikimediaCommons)Despite having many similarities, each of the hepatitis viruses has its own unique characteristics. HAV is generallytransmitted through the fecal-oral route, close personal contact, or exposure to contaminated water or food. HepatitisA can develop after an incubation period of 15 to 50 days (the mean is 30). It is normally mild or even asymptomaticand is usually self-limiting within weeks to months. A more severe form, fulminant hepatitis, rarely occurs but has ahigh fatality rate of 70–80%. Vaccination is available and is recommended especially for children (between ages oneand two), those traveling to countries with higher risk, those with liver disease and certain other conditions, and drugusers.Although HBV is associated with similar signs and symptoms, transmission and outcomes differ. This virus has amean incubation period of 120 days and is generally associated with exposure to infectious blood or body fluidssuch as semen or saliva. Exposure can occur through skin puncture, across the placenta, or through mucosal contact,but it is not spread through casual contact such as hugging, hand holding, sneezing, or coughing, or even throughbreastfeeding or kissing. Risk of infection is greatest for those who use intravenous drugs or who have sexual contactwith an infected individual. Health-care workers are also at risk from needle sticks and other injuries when treatinginfected patients. The infection can become chronic and may progress to cirrhosis or liver failure. It is also associatedwith liver cancer. Chronic infections are associated with the highest mortality rates and are more common in infants.Approximately 90% of infected infants become chronic carriers, compared with only 6–10% of infected adults.[17]Vaccination is available and is recommended for children as part of the standard vaccination schedule (one dose atbirth and the second by 18 months of age) and for adults at greater risk (e.g., those with certain diseases, intravenousdrug users, and those who have sex with multiple partners). Health-care agencies are required to offer the HBVvaccine to all workers who have occupational exposure to blood and/or other infectious materials.HCV is often undiagnosed and therefore may be more widespread than is documented. It has a mean incubation17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “The ABCs of Hepatitis.” Updated 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/resources/professionals/pdfs/abctable.pdf.1086 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5period of 45 days and is transmitted through contact with infected blood. Although some cases are asymptomaticand/or resolve spontaneously, 75%–85% of infected individuals become chronic carriers. Nearly all cases result fromparenteral transmission often associated with IV drug use or transfusions. The risk is greatest for individuals with pastor current history of intravenous drug use or who have had sexual contact with infected individuals. It has also beenspread through contaminated blood products and can even be transmitted through contaminated personal productssuch as toothbrushes and razors. New medications have recently been developed that show great effectiveness intreating HCV and that are tailored to the specific genotype causing the infection.HDV is uncommon in the United States and only occurs in individuals who are already infected with HBV, whichit requires for replication. Therefore, vaccination against HBV is also protective against HDV infection. HDV istransmitted through contact with infected blood.HEV infections are also rare in the United States but many individuals have a positive antibody titer for HEV.The virus is most commonly spread by the fecal-oral route through food and/or water contamination, or personto-person contact, depending on the genotype of the virus, which varies by location. There are four genotypes thatdiffer somewhat in their mode of transmission, distribution, and other factors (for example, two are zoonotic andtwo are not, and only one causes chronic infection). Genotypes three and four are only transmitted through food,while genotypes one and two are also transmitted through water and fecal-oral routes. Genotype one is the only typetransmitted person-to-person and is the most common cause of HEV outbreaks. Consumption of undercooked meat,especially deer or pork, and shellfish can lead to infection. Genotypes three and four are zoonoses, so they can betransmitted from infected animals that are consumed. Pregnant women are at particular risk. This disease is usuallyself-limiting within two weeks and does not appear to cause chronic infection.General laboratory testing for hepatitis begins with blood testing to examine liver function (Figure 24.28). Whenthe liver is not functioning normally, the blood will contain elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, alanineaminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), direct bilirubin, total bilirubin, serum albumin, serumtotal protein, and calculated globulin, albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio. Some of these are included in a completemetabolic panel (CMP), which may first suggest a possible liver problem and indicate the need for morecomprehensive testing. A hepatitis virus serological test panel can be used to detect antibodies for hepatitis viruses A,B, C, and sometimes D. Additionally, other immunological and genomic tests are available.Specific treatments other than supportive therapy, rest, and fluids are often not available for hepatitis virus infection,except for HCV, which is often self-limited. Immunoglobulins can be used prophylactically following possibleexposure. Medications are also used, including interferon alpha 2b and antivirals (e.g., lamivudine, entecavir,adefovir, and telbivudine) for chronic infections. Hepatitis C can be treated with interferon (as monotherapy orcombined with other treatments), protease inhibitors, and other antivirals (e.g., the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir).Combination treatments are commonly used. Antiviral and immunosuppressive medications may be used for chroniccases of HEV. In severe cases, liver transplants may be necessary. Additionally, vaccines are available to preventinfection with HAV and HBV. The HAV vaccine is also protective against HEV. The HBV vaccine is also protectiveagainst HDV. There is no vaccine against HCV.Learn more information about hepatitis virus (https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/resources/professionals/pdfs/abctable.pdf) infections.Link to LearningChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1087• Why do the five different hepatitis viruses all cause similar signs and symptoms?Preventing HBV Transmission in Health-Care SettingsHepatitis B was once a leading on-the-job hazard for health-care workers. Many health-care workers over theyears have become infected, some developing cirrhosis and liver cancer. In 1982, the CDC recommended thathealth-care workers be vaccinated against HBV, and rates of infection have declined since then. Even thoughvaccination is now common, it is not always effective and not all individuals are vaccinated. Therefore, thereis still a small risk for infection, especially for health-care workers working with individuals who have chronicinfections, such as drug addicts, and for those with higher risk of needle sticks, such as phlebotomists. Dentistsare also at risk.Health-care workers need to take appropriate precautions to prevent infection by HBV and other illnesses.Blood is the greatest risk, but other body fluids can also transmit infection. Damaged skin, as occurs witheczema or psoriasis, can also allow transmission. Avoiding contact with body fluids, especially blood, bywearing gloves and face protection and using disposable syringes and needles reduce the risk of infection.Washing exposed skin with soap and water is recommended. Antiseptics may also be used, but may not help.Post-exposure treatment, including treatment with hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) and vaccination, maybe used in the event of exposure to the virus from an infected patient. Detailed protocols are available formanaging these situations. The virus can remain infective for up to seven days when on surfaces, even if noblood or other fluids are visible, so it is important to consider the best choices for disinfecting and sterilizingequipment that could potentially transmit the virus. The CDC recommends a solution of 10% bleach to disinfectsurfaces.[18] Finally, testing blood products is important to reduce the risk of transmission during transfusionsand similar procedures.Viral HepatitisHepatitis involves inflammation of the liver that typically manifests with signs and symptoms such as jaundice,nausea, vomiting, joint pain, gray stool, and loss of appetite. However, the severity and duration of thedisease can vary greatly depending on the causative agent. Some infections may be completely asymptomatic,whereas others may be life threatening. The five different viruses capable of causing hepatitis are comparedin Figure 24.28. For the sake of comparison, this table presents only the unique aspects of each form of viralhepatitis, not the commonalities.Micro ConnectionsDisease Profile18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Hepatitis B FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated August 4, 2016.http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/HBV/HBVfaq.htm.1088 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.28Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 108924.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common protozoans that can cause infections of the GI tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific protozoan diseases affecting the GI tractLike other microbes, protozoa are abundant in natural microbiota but can also be associated with significant illness.Gastrointestinal diseases caused by protozoa are generally associated with exposure to contaminated food and water,meaning that those without access to good sanitation are at greatest risk. Even in developed countries, infections canoccur and these microbes have sometimes caused significant outbreaks from contamination of public water supplies.GiardiasisAlso called backpacker’s diarrhea or beaver fever, giardiasis is a common disease in the United States caused bythe flagellated protist Giardia lamblia, also known as Giardia intestinalis or Giardia duodenalis (Figure 1.16). Toestablish infection, G. lamblia uses a large adhesive disk to attach to the intestinal mucosa. The disk is comprised ofmicrotubules. During adhesion, the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disk,resulting in an area of lower pressure that promotes its adhesion to the intestinal epithelial cells. Due to its attachment,Giardia also blocks absorption of nutrients, including fats.Transmission occurs through contaminated food or water or directly from person to person. Children in day-carecenters are at risk due to their tendency to put items into their mouths that may be contaminated. Large outbreaks mayoccur if a public water supply becomes contaminated. Giardia have a resistant cyst stage in their life cycle that is ableto survive cold temperatures and the chlorination treatment typically used for drinking water in municipal reservoirs.As a result, municipal water must be filtered to trap and remove these cysts. Once consumed by the host, Giardiadevelops into the active tropozoite.Infected individuals may be asymptomatic or have gastrointestinal signs and symptoms, sometimes accompanied byweight loss. Common symptoms, which appear one to three weeks after exposure, include diarrhea, nausea, stomachcramps, gas, greasy stool (because fat absorption is being blocked), and possible dehydration. The parasite remainsin the colon and does not cause systemic infection. Signs and symptoms generally clear within two to six weeks.Chronic infections may develop and are often resistant to treatment. These are associated with weight loss, episodicdiarrhea, and malabsorption syndrome due to the blocked nutrient absorption.Diagnosis may be made using observation under the microscope. A stool ova and parasite (O&P) exam involvesdirect examination of a stool sample for the presence of cysts and trophozoites; it can be used to distinguish commonparasitic intestinal infections. ELISA and other immunoassay tests, including commercial direct fluorescenceantibody kits, are also used. The most common treatments use metronidazole as the first-line choice, followed bytinidazole. If the infection becomes chronic, the parasites may become resistant to medications.CryptosporidiosisAnother protozoan intestinal illness is cryptosporidiosis, which is usually caused by Cryptosporidium parvum orC. hominis. (Figure 24.29) These pathogens are commonly found in animals and can be spread in feces frommice, birds, and farm animals. Contaminated water and food are most commonly responsible for transmission. Theprotozoan can also be transmitted through human contact with infected animals or their feces.In the United States, outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis generally occur through contamination of the public water supplyor contaminated water at water parks, swimming pools, and day-care centers. The risk is greatest in areas with poorsanitation, making the disease more common in developing countries.Signs and symptoms include watery diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, cramps, fever, dehydration, and weight loss. Theillness is generally self-limiting within a month. However, immunocompromised patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, are at particular risk of severe illness or death.1090 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Diagnosis involves direct examination of stool samples, often over multiple days. As with giardiasis, a stool O&Pexam may be helpful. Acid fast staining is often used. Enzyme immunoassays and molecular analysis (PCR) areavailable.The first line of treatment is typically oral rehydration therapy. Medications are sometimes used to treat the diarrhea.The broad-range anti-parasitic drug nitazoxanide can be used to treat cryptosporidiosis. Other anti-parasitic drugs thatcan be used include azithromycin and paromomycin.Figure 24.29 Immunofluorescent staining allows for visualization of Cryptosporidium spp. (credit: modification ofwork by EPA/H.D.A. Lindquist)Amoebiasis (Amebiasis)The protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica causes amoebiasis, which is known as amoebic dysentery in severecases. E. histolytica is generally transmitted through water or food that has fecal contamination. The disease is mostwidespread in the developing world and is one of the leading causes of mortality from parasitic disease worldwide.Disease can be caused by as few as 10 cysts being transmitted.Signs and symptoms range from nonexistent to mild diarrhea to severe amoebic dysentery. Severe infection causes theabdomen to become distended and may be associated with fever. The parasite may live in the colon without causingsigns or symptoms or may invade the mucosa to cause colitis. In some cases, the disease spreads to the spleen, brain,genitourinary tract, or lungs. In particular, it may spread to the liver and cause an abscess. When a liver abscessdevelops, fever, nausea, liver tenderness, weight loss, and pain in the right abdominal quadrant may occur. Chronicinfection may occur and is associated with intermittent diarrhea, mucus, pain, flatulence, and weight loss.Direct examination of fecal specimens may be used for diagnosis. As with cryptosporidiosis, samples are oftenexamined on multiple days. A stool O&P exam of fecal or biopsy specimens may be helpful. Immunoassay, serology,biopsy, molecular, and antibody detection tests are available. Enzyme immunoassay may not distinguish current frompast illness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to detect any liver abscesses. The first line of treatmentis metronidazole or tinidazole, followed by diloxanide furoate, iodoquinol, or paromomycin to eliminate the cysts thatremain.CyclosporiasisThe intestinal disease cyclosporiasis is caused by the protozoan Cyclospora cayetanensis. It is endemic to tropicaland subtropical regions and therefore uncommon in the United States, although there have been outbreaks associatedwith contaminated produce imported from regions where the protozoan is more common.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1091This protist is transmitted through contaminated food and water and reaches the lining of the small intestine, where itcauses infection. Signs and symptoms begin within seven to ten days after ingestion. Based on limited data, it appearsto be seasonal in ways that differ regionally and that are poorly understood.[19]Some individuals do not develop signs or symptoms. Those who do may exhibit explosive and watery diarrhea,fever, nausea, vomiting, cramps, loss of appetite, fatigue, and bloating. These symptoms may last for months withouttreatment. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the recommended treatment.Microscopic examination is used for diagnosis. A stool O&P examination may be helpful. The oocysts have adistinctive blue halo when viewed using ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy (Figure 24.30).Figure 24.30 Cyclospora cayetanensis are autofluorescent under ultraviolet light. (credit: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)• Which protozoan GI infections are common in the United States?Protozoan Gastrointestinal InfectionsProtozoan GI infections are generally transmitted through contaminated food or water, triggering diarrhea andvomiting that can lead to dehydration. Rehydration therapy is an important aspect of treatment, but mostprotozoan GI infections can also be treated with drugs that target protozoans.Disease Profile19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Cyclosporiasis FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated June 13, 2014.http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/cyclosporiasis/health_professionals/hp-faqs.html.1092 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.3124.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal TractLearning Objectives• Identify the most common helminths that cause infections of the GI tract• Compare the major characteristics of specific helminthic diseases affecting GI tractHelminths are widespread intestinal parasites. These parasites can be divided into three common groups: roundbodiedworms also described as nematodes, flat-bodied worms that are segmented (also described as cestodes),and flat-bodied worms that are non-segmented (also described as trematodes). The nematodes include roundworms,pinworms, hookworms, and whipworms. Cestodes include beef, pork, and fish tapeworms. Trematodes arecollectively called flukes and more uniquely identified with the body site where the adult flukes are located. Althoughinfection can have serious consequences, many of these parasites are so well adapted to the human host that there islittle obvious disease.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1093AscariasisInfections caused by the large nematode roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides, a soil-transmitted helminth, are calledascariasis. Over 800 million to 1 billion people are estimated to be infected worldwide.[20] Infections are mostcommon in warmer climates and at warmer times of year. At present, infections are uncommon in the United States.The eggs of the worms are transmitted through contaminated food and water. This may happen if food is grown incontaminated soil, including when manure is used as fertilizer.When an individual consumes embryonated eggs (those with a developing embryo), the eggs travel to the intestineand the larvae are able to hatch. Ascaris is able to produce proteases that allow for penetration and degradation of hosttissue. The juvenile worms can then enter the circulatory system and migrate to the lungs where they enter the alveoli(air sacs). From here they crawl to the pharynx and then follow the gut lumen to return to the small intestine, wherethey mature into adult roundworms. Females in the host will produce and release eggs that leave the host via feces. Insome cases, the worms can block ducts such as those of the pancreas or gallbladder.The infection is commonly asymptomatic. When signs and symptoms are present, they include shortness of breath,cough, nausea, diarrhea, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, weight loss, and fatigue. The roundworms may be visiblein the stool. In severe cases, children with substantial infections may experience intestinal blockage.The eggs can be identified by microscopic examination of the stool (Figure 24.32). In some cases, the wormsthemselves may be identified if coughed up or excreted in stool. They can also sometimes be identified by X-rays,ultrasounds, or MRIs.Ascariasis is self-limiting, but can last one to two years because the worms can inhibit the body’s inflammatoryresponse through glycan gimmickry (see Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens). The first line oftreatment is mebendazole or albendazole. In some severe cases, surgery may be required.Figure 24.32 (a) Adult Ascaris lumbricoides roundworms can cause intestinal blockage. (b) This mass of A.lumbricoides worms was excreted by a child. (c) A micrograph of a fertilized egg of A. lumbricoides. Fertilized eggscan be distinguished from unfertilized eggs because they are round rather than elongated and have a thicker cellwall. (credit a: modification of work by South African Medical Research Council; credit b: modification of work byJames Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)• Describe the route by which A. lumbricoides reaches the host’s intestines as an adult worm.20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Ascariasis.” Updated May 24, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/ascariasis/index.html.1094 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5HookwormTwo species of nematode worms are associated with hookworm infection. Both species are found in the Americas,Africa, and Asia. Necator americanus is found predominantly in the United States and Australia. Another species,Ancylostoma doudenale, is found in southern Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Asia.The eggs of these species develop into larvae in soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. These larvae can penetratethe skin. After traveling through the venous circulation, they reach the lungs. When they are coughed up, they arethen swallowed and can enter the intestine and develop into mature adults. At this stage, they attach to the wall of theintestine, where they feed on blood and can potentially cause anemia. Signs and symptoms include cough, an itchyrash, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. In children, hookworms can affect physical and cognitive growth.Some hookworm species, such as Ancylostoma braziliense that is commonly found in animals such as cats and dogs,can penetrate human skin and migrate, causing cutaneous larva migrans, a skin disease caused by the larvae ofhookworms. As they move across the skin, in the subcutaneous tissue, pruritic tracks appear (Figure 24.33).The infection is diagnosed using microscopic examination of the stool, allowing for observation of eggs in the feces.Medications such as albendazole, mebendazole, and pyrantel pamoate are used as needed to treat systemic infection.In addition to systemic medication for symptoms associated with cutaneous larva migrans, topical thiabendazole isapplied to the affected areas.Figure 24.33 (a) This animal hookworm, Ancylostoma caninum, is attached to the intestinal wall. (b) The tracks ofhookworms are visible in this individual with cutaneous larva migrans. (c) This micrograph shows the microscopic eggof a hookworm. (credit a, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)StrongyloidiasisStrongyloidiasis is generally caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, a soil-transmitted helminth with both free-livingand parasitic forms. In the parasitic form, the larvae of these nematodes generally penetrate the body through theskin, especially through bare feet, although transmission through organ transplantation or at facilities like day-carecenters can also occur. When excreted in the stool, larvae can become free-living adults rather than developing intothe parasitic form. These free-living worms reproduce, laying eggs that hatch into larvae that can develop into theparasitic form. In the parasitic life cycle, infective larvae enter the skin, generally through the feet. The larvae reachthe circulatory system, which allows them to travel to the alveolar spaces of the lungs. They are transported to thepharynx where, like many other helminths, the infected patient coughs them up and swallows them again so that theyreturn to the intestine. Once they reach the intestine, females live in the epithelium and produce eggs that developasexually, unlike the free-living forms, which use sexual reproduction. The larvae may be excreted in the stool or canreinfect the host by entering the tissue of the intestines and skin around the anus, which can lead to chronic infections.The condition is generally asymptomatic, although severe symptoms can develop after treatment with corticosteroidsfor asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or following other forms of immunosuppression. When theimmune system is suppressed, the rate of autoinfection increases, and huge amounts of larvae migrate to organsChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1095throughout the body.Signs and symptoms are generally nonspecific. The condition can cause a rash at the site of skin entry, cough (dryor with blood), fever, nausea, difficulty breathing, bloating, pain, heartburn, and, rarely, arthritis, or cardiac or kidneycomplications. Disseminated strongyloidiasis or hyperinfection is a life-threatening form of the disease that can occur,usually following immunosuppression such as that caused by glucocorticoid treatment (most commonly), with otherimmunosuppressive medications, with HIV infection, or with malnutrition.As with other helminths, direct examination of the stool is important in diagnosis. Ideally, this should be continuedover seven days. Serological testing, including antigen testing, is also available. These can be limited by crossreactionswith other similar parasites and by the inability to distinguish current from resolved infection. Ivermectin isthe preferred treatment, with albendazole as a secondary option.• How does an acute infection of S. stercoralis become chronic?Pinworms (Enterobiasis)Enterobius vermicularis, commonly called pinworms, are tiny (2–13 mm) nematodes that cause enterobiasis. Ofall helminthic infections, enterobiasis is the most common in the United States, affecting as many as one-third ofAmerican children.[21] Although the signs and symptoms are generally mild, patients may experience abdominal painand insomnia from itching of the perianal region, which frequently occurs at night when worms leave the anus tolay eggs. The itching contributes to transmission, as the disease is transmitted through the fecal-oral route. Whenan infected individual scratches the anal area, eggs may get under the fingernails and later be deposited near theindividual’s mouth, causing reinfection, or on fomites, where they can be transferred to new hosts. After beingingested, the larvae hatch within the small intestine and then take up residence in the colon and develop into adults.From the colon, the female adult exits the body at night to lay eggs (Figure 24.34).Infection is diagnosed in any of three ways. First, because the worms emerge at night to lay eggs, it is possible toinspect the perianal region for worms while an individual is asleep. An alternative is to use transparent tape to removeeggs from the area around the anus first thing in the morning for three days to yield eggs for microscopic examination.Finally, it may be possible to detect eggs through examination of samples from under the fingernails, where eggsmay lodge due to scratching. Once diagnosis has been made, mebendazole, albendazole, and pyrantel pamoate areeffective for treatment.21. “Roundworms.” University of Maryland Medical Center Medical Reference Guide. Last reviewed December 9, 2014. https://umm.edu/health/medical/altmed/condition/roundworms.1096 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.34 (a) E. vermicularis are tiny nematodes commonly called pinworms. (b) This micrograph showspinworm eggs.TrichuriasisThe nematode whipworm Trichuris trichiura is a parasite that is transmitted by ingestion from soil-contaminatedhands or food and causes trichuriasis. Infection is most common in warm environments, especially when there ispoor sanitation and greater risk of fecal contamination of soil, or when food is grown in soil using manure as afertilizer. The signs and symptoms may be minimal or nonexistent. When a substantial infection develops, signs andsymptoms include painful, frequent diarrhea that may contain mucus and blood. It is possible for the infection tocause rectal prolapse, a condition in which a portion of the rectum becomes detached from the inside of the bodyand protrudes from the anus (Figure 24.35). Severely infected children may experience reduced growth and theircognitive development may be affected.When fertilized eggs are ingested, they travel to the intestine and the larvae emerge, taking up residence in the wallsof the colon and cecum. They attach themselves with part of their bodies embedded in the mucosa. The larvae matureand live in the cecum and ascending colon. After 60 to 70 days, females begin to lay 3000 to 20,000 eggs per day.Diagnosis involves examination of the feces for the presence of eggs. It may be necessary to use concentrationtechniques and to collect specimens on multiple days. Following diagnosis, the infection may be treated withmebendazole, albendazole, or ivermectin.Figure 24.35 (a) This adult female Trichuris whipworm is a soil-transmitted parasite. (b) Trichuris trichiura eggs areingested and travel to the intestines where the larvae emerge and take up residence. (c) Rectal prolapse is acondition that can result from whipworm infections. It occurs when the rectum loses its attachment to the internalbody structure and protrudes from the anus. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1097TrichinosisTrichinosis (trichenellosis) develops following consumption of food that contains Trichinella spiralis (mostcommonly) or other Trichinella species. These microscopic nematode worms are most commonly transmitted in meat,especially pork, that has not been cooked thoroughly. T. spiralis larvae in meat emerge from cysts when exposed toacid and pepsin in the stomach. They develop into mature adults within the large intestine. The larvae produced in thelarge intestine are able to migrate into the muscles mechanically via the stylet of the parasite, forming cysts. Muscleproteins are reduced in abundance or undetectable in cells that contain Trichinella (nurse cells). Animals that ingestthe cysts from other animals can later develop infection (Figure 24.36).Although infection may be asymptomatic, symptomatic infections begin within a day or two of consuming thenematodes. Abdominal symptoms arise first and can include diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain. Otherpossible symptoms include headache, light sensitivity, muscle pain, fever, cough, chills, and conjunctivitis. Moresevere symptoms affecting motor coordination, breathing, and the heart sometimes occur. It may take months for thesymptoms to resolve, and the condition is occasionally fatal. Mild cases may be mistaken for influenza or similarconditions.Infection is diagnosed using clinical history, muscle biopsy to look for larvae, and serological testing, includingimmunoassays. Enzyme immunoassay is the most common test. It is difficult to effectively treat larvae that haveformed cysts in the muscle, although medications may help. It is best to begin treatment as soon as possible becausemedications such as mebendazole and albendazole are effective in killing only the adult worms in the intestine.Steroids may be used to reduce inflammation if larvae are in the muscles.Figure 24.36 (a) This image shows larvae of T. spiralis within muscle. (b) In meat, the larvae have a characteristiccoiled appearance, as seen in this partially digested larva in bear meat. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention)• Compare and contrast the transmissions of pinworms and whipworms.Tapeworms (Taeniasis)Taeniasis is a tapeworm infection, generally caused by pork (Taenia solium), beef (Taenia saginata), and Asian1098 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5(Taenia asiatica) tapeworms found in undercooked meat. Consumption of raw or undercooked fish, includingcontaminated sushi, can also result in infection from the fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). Tapeworms areflatworms (cestodes) with multiple body segments and a head called a scolex that attaches to the intestinal wall.Tapeworms can become quite large, reaching 4 to 8 meters long (Figure 24.37). Figure 5.23 illustrates the lifecycle of a tapeworm.Figure 24.37 (a) An adult tapeworm uses the scolex to attach to the intestinal wall. (b) The egg of a pork tapeworm(Taenia solium) is visible in this micrograph. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Tapeworms attached to the intestinal wall produce eggs that are excreted in feces. After ingestion by animals, the eggshatch and the larvae emerge. They may take up residence in the intestine, but can sometimes move to other tissues,especially muscle or brain tissue. When T. solium larvae form cysts in tissue, the condition is called cysticercosis.This occurs through ingestion of eggs via the fecal-oral route, not through consumption of undercooked meat. It candevelop in the muscles, eye (ophthalmic cysticercosis), or brain (neurocysticercosis).Infections may be asymptomatic or they may cause mild gastrointestinal symptoms such as epigastric discomfort,nausea, diarrhea, flatulence, or hunger pains. It is also common to find visible tapeworm segments passed in the stool.In cases of cysticercosis, symptoms differ depending upon where the cysts become established. Neurocysticercosiscan have severe, life-threatening consequences and is associated with headaches and seizures because of the presenceof the tapeworm larvae encysted in the brain. Cysts in muscles may be asymptomatic, or they may be painful.To diagnose these conditions, microscopic analysis of stool samples from three separate days is generallyrecommended. Eggs or body segments, called proglottids, may be visible in these samples. Molecular methodshave been developed but are not yet widely available. Imaging, such as CT and MRI, may be used to detect cysts.Praziquantel or niclosamide are used for treatment.What’s in Your Sushi Roll?As foods that contain raw fish, such as sushi and sashimi, continue to increase in popularity throughout theworld, so does the risk of parasitic infections carried by raw or undercooked fish. Diphyllobothrium species,known as fish tapeworms, is one of the main culprits. Evidence suggests that undercooked salmon caused anincrease in Diphyllobothrium infections in British Columbia in the 1970s and early 1980s. In the years since,the number of reported cases in the United States and Canada has been low, but it is likely that cases areunderreported because the causative agent is not easily recognized.[22]Another illness transmitted in undercooked fish is herring worm disease, or anisakiasis, in which nematodesMicro ConnectionsChapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1099attach to the epithelium of the esophagus, stomach, or small intestine. Cases have increased around the worldas raw fish consumption has increased.[23]Although the message may be unpopular with sushi lovers, fish should be frozen or cooked before eating. Theextremely low and high temperatures associated with freezing and cooking kill worms and larvae contained inthe meat, thereby preventing infection. Ingesting fresh, raw sushi may make for a delightful meal, but it alsoentails some risk.Hydatid DiseaseAnother cestode, Echinococcus granulosus, causes a serious infection known as hydatid disease (cysticechinococcosis). E. granulosus is found in dogs (the definitive host), as well as several intermediate hosts (sheep,pigs, goats, cattle). The cestodes are transmitted through eggs in the feces from infected animals, which can be anoccupational hazard for individuals who work in agriculture.Once ingested, E. granulosus eggs hatch in the small intestine and release the larvae. The larvae invade the intestinalwall to gain access to the circulatory system. They form hydatid cysts in internal organs, especially in the lungs andliver, that grow slowly and are often undetected until they become large. If the cysts burst, a severe allergic reaction(anaphylaxis) may occur.Cysts present in the liver can cause enlargement of the liver, nausea, vomiting, right epigastric pain, pain in the rightupper quadrant, and possible allergic signs and symptoms. Cysts in the lungs can lead to alveolar disease. Abdominalpain, weight loss, pain, and malaise may occur, and inflammatory processes develop.E. granulosus can be detected through imaging (ultrasonography, CT, MRI) that shows the cysts. Serologic tests,including ELISA and indirect hemagglutinin tests, are used. Cystic disease is most effectively treated with surgeryto remove cysts, but other treatments are also available, including chemotherapy with anti-helminthic drugs(albendazole or mebendazole).• Describe the risks of the cysts associated with taeniasis and hydatid disease.FlukesFlukes are flatworms that have a leaflike appearance. They are a type of trematode worm, and multiple species areassociated with disease in humans. The most common are liver flukes and intestinal flukes (Figure 24.38).22. Nancy Craig. “Fish Tapeworm and Sushi.” Canadian Family Physician 58 (2012) 6: pp. 654–658. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3374688/.23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Anisakiasis FAQs.” Updated November 12, 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/anisakiasis/faqs.html.1100 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.38 (a) A liver fluke infects the bile ducts. (b) An intestinal fluke infects the intestines. (credit a: modificationof work by Shafiei R, Sarkari B, Sadjjadi SM, Mowlavi GR, and Moshfe A; credit b: modification of work by GeorgiaDivision of Public Health)Liver FlukesThe liver flukes are several species of trematodes that cause disease by interfering with the bile duct. Fascioliasisis caused by Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica in contaminated raw or undercooked aquatic plants (e.g.,watercress). In Fasciola infection, adult flukes develop in the bile duct and release eggs into the feces. Clonochiasisis caused by Clonorchis sinensis in contaminated freshwater fish. Other flukes, such as Opisthorchis viverrini (foundin fish) and Opisthorchis felineus (found in freshwater snails), also cause infections. Liver flukes spend part of theirlife cycle in freshwater snails, which serve as an intermediate host. Humans are typically infected after eating aquaticplants contaminated by the infective larvae after they have left the snail. Once they reach the human intestine, theymigrate back to the bile duct, where they mature. The life cycle is similar for the other infectious liver flukes, (seeFigure 5.22).When Fasciola flukes cause acute infection, signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, rash,fever, malaise, and breathing difficulties. If the infection becomes chronic, with adult flukes living in the bileduct, then cholangitis, cirrhosis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and gallstones may develop. Symptoms are similar forinfections by other liver flukes. Cholangiocarcinoma can occur from C. sinensis infection. The Opisthorchis speciescan also be associated with cancer development.Diagnosis is accomplished using patient history and examination of samples from feces or other samples (such asvomitus). Because the eggs may appear similar, immunoassay techniques are available that can help distinguishspecies. The preferred treatment for fascioliasis is triclabendazole. C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp. infections aretreated with praziquantel or albendazole.Intestinal FlukesThe intestinal flukes are trematodes that develop in the intestines. Many, such as Fasciolopsis buski, which causesfasciolopsiasis, are closely related to liver flukes. Intestinal flukes are ingested from contaminated aquatic plants thathave not been properly cooked. When the cysts are consumed, the larvae emerge in the duodenum and develop intoadults while attached to the intestinal epithelium. The eggs are released in stool.Intestinal fluke infection is often asymptomatic, but some cases may involve mild diarrhea and abdominal pain. Moresevere symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, allergic reactions, and anemia can sometimes occur, and high parasiteloads may sometimes lead to intestinal obstructions.Diagnosis is the same as with liver flukes: examination of feces or other samples and immunoassay. Praziquantel isused to treat infections caused by intestinal flukes.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1101• How are flukes transmitted?Helminthic Gastrointestinal InfectionsNumerous helminths are capable of colonizing the GI tract. Many such infections are asymptomatic, but othersmay cause signs and symptoms ranging from mild GI stress to severe systemic infection. Helminths havecomplex and unique life cycles that dictate their specific modes of transmission. Most helminthic infections canbe treated with medications.Disease Profile1102 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 24.39Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1103Figure 24.40ResolutionCarli’s doctor explained that she had bacterial gastroenteritis caused by Salmonella bacteria. The source ofthese bacteria was likely the undercooked egg. Had the egg been fully cooked, the high temperature wouldhave been sufficient to kill any Salmonella in or on the egg. In this case, enough bacteria survived to cause aninfection once the egg was eaten.Carli’s signs and symptoms continued to worsen. Her fever became higher, her vomiting and diarrheacontinued, and she began to become dehydrated. She felt thirsty all the time and had continual abdominalcramps. Carli’s doctor treated her with intravenous fluids to help with her dehydration, but did not prescribeantibiotics. Carli’s parents were confused because they thought a bacterial infection should always be treatedwith antibiotics.The doctor explained that the worst medical problem for Carli was dehydration. Except in the most vulnerableClinical Focus1104 Chapter 24 | Digestive System InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5and sick patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, antibiotics do not reduce recovery time or improve outcomesin Salmonella infections. In fact, antibiotics can actually delay the natural excretion of bacteria from the body.Rehydration therapy replenishes lost fluids, diminishing the effects of dehydration and improving the patient’scondition while the infection resolves.After two days of rehydration therapy, Carli’s signs and symptoms began to fade. She was still somewhatthirsty, but the amount of urine she passed became larger and the color lighter. She stopped vomiting. Herfever was gone, and so was the diarrhea. At that point, stool analysis found very few Salmonella bacteria. Inone week, Carli was discharged as fully recovered.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System• The digestive tract, consisting of the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and largeintestine, has a normal microbiota that is important for health.• The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal canal, the protective layer of mucus, thenormal microbiota, and the harsh chemical environment in the stomach and small intestine help to preventcolonization by pathogens.• Infections or microbial toxins in the oral cavity can cause tooth decay, periodontal disease, and various typesof ulcers.• Infections and intoxications of the gastrointestinal tract can cause general symptoms such as nausea, vomiting,diarrhea, and fever. Localized inflammation of the GI tract can result in gastritis, enteritis, gastroenteritis,hepatitis, or colitis, and damage to epithelial cells of the colon can lead to dysentery.• Foodborne illness refers to infections or intoxications that originate with pathogens or toxins ingested incontaminated food or water.24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity• Dental caries, tartar, and gingivitis are caused by overgrowth of oral bacteria, usually Streptococcus andActinomyces species, as a result of insufficient dental hygiene.• Gingivitis can worsen, allowing Porphyromonas, Streptococcus, and Actinomyces species to spread and causeperiodontitis. When Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and Treponema vicentii are involved, itcan lead to acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.• The herpes simplex virus type 1 can cause lesions of the mouth and throat called herpetic gingivostomatitis.• Other infections of the mouth include oral thrush, a fungal infection caused by overgrowth of Candida yeast,and mumps, a viral infection of the salivary glands caused by the mumps virus, a paramyxovirus.24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract• Major causes of gastrointestinal illness include Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus spp., Helicobacter pylori,Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile, Bacillus cereus, and Yersinia bacteria.• C. difficile is an important cause of hospital acquired infection.• Vibrio cholerae causes cholera, which can be a severe diarrheal illness.• Different strains of E. coli, including ETEC, EPEC, EIEC, and EHEC, cause different illnesses with varyingdegrees of severity.• H. pylori is associated with peptic ulcers.• Salmonella enterica serotypes can cause typhoid fever, a more severe illness than salmonellosis.• Rehydration and other supportive therapies are often used as general treatments.Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections 1105• Careful antibiotic use is required to reduce the risk of causing C. difficile infections and when treatingantibiotic-resistant infections.24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract• Common viral causes of gastroenteritis include rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses.• Hepatitis may be caused by several unrelated viruses: hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, and E.• The hepatitis viruses differ in their modes of transmission, treatment, and potential for chronic infection.24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract• Giardiasis, cryptosporidiosis, amoebiasis, and cyclosporiasis are intestinal infections caused by protozoans.• Protozoan intestinal infections are commonly transmitted through contaminated food and water.• Treatment varies depending on the causative agent, so proper diagnosis is important.• Microscopic examination of stool or biopsy specimens is often used in diagnosis, in combination with otherapproaches.24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract• Helminths often cause intestinal infections after transmission to humans through exposure to contaminatedsoil, water, or food. Signs and symptoms are often mild, but severe complications may develop in some cases.• Ascaris lumbricoides eggs are transmitted through contaminated food or water and hatch in the intestine.Juvenile larvae travel to the lungs and then to the pharynx, where they are swallowed and returned to theintestines to mature. These nematode roundworms cause ascariasis.• Necator americanus and Ancylostoma doudenale cause hookworm infection when larvae penetrate the skinfrom soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. They travel to the lungs and are then swallowed to mature in theintestines.• Strongyloides stercoralis are transmitted from soil through the skin to the lungs and then to the intestine wherethey cause strongyloidiasis.• Enterobius vermicularis are nematode pinworms transmitted by the fecal-oral route. After ingestion, theytravel to the colon where they cause enterobiasis.• Trichuris trichiura can be transmitted through soil or fecal contamination and cause trichuriasis. Afteringestion, the eggs travel to the intestine where the larvae emerge and mature, attaching to the walls of thecolon and cecum.• Trichinella spp. is transmitted through undercooked meat. Larvae in the meat emerge from cysts and maturein the large intestine. They can migrate to the muscles and form new cysts, causing trichinosis.• Taenia spp. and Diphyllobothrium latum are tapeworms transmitted through undercooked food or the fecaloralroute. Taenia infections cause taeniasis. Tapeworms use their scolex to attach to the intestinal wall.Larvae may also move to muscle or brain tissue.• Echinococcus granulosus is a cestode transmitted through eggs in the feces of infected animals, especiallydogs. After ingestion, eggs hatch in the small intestine, and the larvae invade the intestinal wall and travelthrough the circulatory system to form dangerous cysts in internal organs, causing hydatid disease.• Flukes are transmitted through aquatic plants or fish. Liver flukes cause disease by interfering with the bile duct. Intestinal flukes develop in the intestines, where they attach to the intestinal epithelium.