Chapter 3The CellFigure 3.1 Microorganisms vary visually in their size and shape, as can be observed microscopically; but they alsovary in invisible ways, such as in their metabolic capabilities. (credit a, e, f: modification of work by Centers forDisease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by NIAID; credit c: modification of work by CSIRO;credit d: modification of work by “Microscopic World”/YouTube)Chapter Outline3.1 Spontaneous Generation3.2 Foundations of Modern Cell Theory3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic CellsIntroductionLife takes many forms, from giant redwood trees towering hundreds of feet in the air to the tiniest known microbes,which measure only a few billionths of a meter. Humans have long pondered life’s origins and debated the definingcharacteristics of life, but our understanding of these concepts has changed radically since the invention of themicroscope. In the 17th century, observations of microscopic life led to the development of the cell theory: the ideathat the fundamental unit of life is the cell, that all organisms contain at least one cell, and that cells only come fromother cells.Despite sharing certain characteristics, cells may vary significantly. The two main types of cells are prokaryotic cells(lacking a nucleus) and eukaryotic cells (containing a well-organized, membrane-bound nucleus). Each type of cellexhibits remarkable variety in structure, function, and metabolic activity (Figure 3.1). This chapter will focus on thehistorical discoveries that have shaped our current understanding of microbes, including their origins and their role inhuman disease. We will then explore the distinguishing structures found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.Chapter 3 | The Cell 893.1 Spontaneous GenerationLearning Objectives• Explain the theory of spontaneous generation and why people once accepted it as an explanation for theexistence of certain types of organisms• Explain how certain individuals (van Helmont, Redi, Needham, Spallanzani, and Pasteur) tried to prove ordisprove spontaneous generationHumans have been asking for millennia: Where does new life come from? Religion, philosophy, and science have allwrestled with this question. One of the oldest explanations was the theory of spontaneous generation, which can betraced back to the ancient Greeks and was widely accepted through the Middle Ages.The Theory of Spontaneous GenerationThe Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BC) was one of the earliest recorded scholars to articulate the theoryof spontaneous generation, the notion that life can arise from nonliving matter. Aristotle proposed that life arosefrom nonliving material if the material contained pneuma (“vital heat”). As evidence, he noted several instancesof the appearance of animals from environments previously devoid of such animals, such as the seemingly suddenappearance of fish in a new puddle of water.[1]This theory persisted into the 17th century, when scientists undertook additional experimentation to support ordisprove it. By this time, the proponents of the theory cited how frogs simply seem to appear along the muddy banksof the Nile River in Egypt during the annual flooding. Others observed that mice simply appeared among grain storedin barns with thatched roofs. When the roof leaked and the grain molded, mice appeared. Jan Baptista van Helmont,a 17th century Flemish scientist, proposed that mice could arise from rags and wheat kernels left in an open containerfor 3 weeks. In reality, such habitats provided ideal food sources and shelter for mouse populations to flourish.However, one of van Helmont’s contemporaries, Italian physician Francesco Redi (1626–1697), performed anexperiment in 1668 that was one of the first to refute the idea that maggots (the larvae of flies) spontaneously generateon meat left out in the open air. He predicted that preventing flies from having direct contact with the meat would alsoprevent the appearance of maggots. Redi left meat in each of six containers (Figure 3.2). Two were open to the air,two were covered with gauze, and two were tightly sealed. His hypothesis was supported when maggots developed inthe uncovered jars, but no maggots appeared in either the gauze-covered or the tightly sealed jars. He concluded thatmaggots could only form when flies were allowed to lay eggs in the meat, and that the maggots were the offspring offlies, not the product of spontaneous generation.Part 1Barbara is a 19-year-old college student living in the dormitory. In January, she came down with a sore throat,headache, mild fever, chills, and a violent but unproductive (i.e., no mucus) cough. To treat these symptoms,Barbara began taking an over-the-counter cold medication, which did not seem to work. In fact, over the nextfew days, while some of Barbara’s symptoms began to resolve, her cough and fever persisted, and she feltvery tired and weak.• What types of respiratory disease may be responsible?Jump to the next Clinical Focus boxClinical Focus1. K. Zwier. “Aristotle on Spontaneous Generation.” http://www.sju.edu/int/academics/cas/resources/gppc/pdf/Karen%20R.%20Zwier.pdf90 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.2 Francesco Redi’s experimental setup consisted of an open container, a container sealed with a cork top,and a container covered in mesh that let in air but not flies. Maggots only appeared on the meat in the opencontainer. However, maggots were also found on the gauze of the gauze-covered container.In 1745, John Needham (1713–1781) published a report of his own experiments, in which he briefly boiled brothinfused with plant or animal matter, hoping to kill all preexisting microbes.[2] He then sealed the flasks. After afew days, Needham observed that the broth had become cloudy and a single drop contained numerous microscopiccreatures. He argued that the new microbes must have arisen spontaneously. In reality, however, he likely did not boilthe broth enough to kill all preexisting microbes.Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729–1799) did not agree with Needham’s conclusions, however, and performed hundreds ofcarefully executed experiments using heated broth.[3] As in Needham’s experiment, broth in sealed jars and unsealedjars was infused with plant and animal matter. Spallanzani’s results contradicted the findings of Needham: Heated butsealed flasks remained clear, without any signs of spontaneous growth, unless the flasks were subsequently openedto the air. This suggested that microbes were introduced into these flasks from the air. In response to Spallanzani’sfindings, Needham argued that life originates from a “life force” that was destroyed during Spallanzani’s extendedboiling. Any subsequent sealing of the flasks then prevented new life force from entering and causing spontaneousgeneration (Figure 3.3).2. E. Capanna. “Lazzaro Spallanzani: At the Roots of Modern Biology.” Journal of Experimental Zoology 285 no. 3 (1999):178–196.3. R. Mancini, M. Nigro, G. Ippolito. “Lazzaro Spallanzani and His Refutation of the Theory of Spontaneous Generation.” Le Infezioni inMedicina 15 no. 3 (2007):199–206.Chapter 3 | The Cell 91Figure 3.3 (a) Francesco Redi, who demonstrated that maggots were the offspring of flies, not products ofspontaneous generation. (b) John Needham, who argued that microbes arose spontaneously in broth from a “lifeforce.” (c) Lazzaro Spallanzani, whose experiments with broth aimed to disprove those of Needham.• Describe the theory of spontaneous generation and some of the arguments used to support it.• Explain how the experiments of Redi and Spallanzani challenged the theory of spontaneous generation.Disproving Spontaneous GenerationThe debate over spontaneous generation continued well into the 19th century, with scientists serving as proponents ofboth sides. To settle the debate, the Paris Academy of Sciences offered a prize for resolution of the problem. LouisPasteur, a prominent French chemist who had been studying microbial fermentation and the causes of wine spoilage,accepted the challenge. In 1858, Pasteur filtered air through a gun-cotton filter and, upon microscopic examination ofthe cotton, found it full of microorganisms, suggesting that the exposure of a broth to air was not introducing a “lifeforce” to the broth but rather airborne microorganisms.Later, Pasteur made a series of flasks with long, twisted necks (“swan-neck” flasks), in which he boiled broth tosterilize it (Figure 3.4). His design allowed air inside the flasks to be exchanged with air from the outside, butprevented the introduction of any airborne microorganisms, which would get caught in the twists and bends of theflasks’ necks. If a life force besides the airborne microorganisms were responsible for microbial growth within thesterilized flasks, it would have access to the broth, whereas the microorganisms would not. He correctly predictedthat sterilized broth in his swan-neck flasks would remain sterile as long as the swan necks remained intact. However,should the necks be broken, microorganisms would be introduced, contaminating the flasks and allowing microbialgrowth within the broth.Pasteur’s set of experiments irrefutably disproved the theory of spontaneous generation and earned him theprestigious Alhumbert Prize from the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1862. In a subsequent lecture in 1864, Pasteurarticulated “Omne vivum ex vivo” (“Life only comes from life”). In this lecture, Pasteur recounted his famous swanneckflask experiment, stating that “…life is a germ and a germ is life. Never will the doctrine of spontaneousgeneration recover from the mortal blow of this simple experiment.”[4] To Pasteur’s credit, it never has.4. R. Vallery-Radot. The Life of Pasteur, trans. R.L. Devonshire. New York: McClure, Phillips and Co, 1902, 1:142.92 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.4 (a) French scientist Louis Pasteur, who definitively refuted the long-disputed theory of spontaneousgeneration. (b) The unique swan-neck feature of the flasks used in Pasteur’s experiment allowed air to enter the flaskbut prevented the entry of bacterial and fungal spores. (c) Pasteur’s experiment consisted of two parts. In the firstpart, the broth in the flask was boiled to sterilize it. When this broth was cooled, it remained free of contamination. Inthe second part of the experiment, the flask was boiled and then the neck was broken off. The broth in this flaskbecame contaminated. (credit b: modification of work by “Wellcome Images”/Wikimedia Commons)• How did Pasteur’s experimental design allow air, but not microbes, to enter, and why was this important?• What was the control group in Pasteur’s experiment and what did it show?Chapter 3 | The Cell 933.2 Foundations of Modern Cell TheoryLearning Objectives• Explain the key points of cell theory and the individual contributions of Hooke, Schleiden, Schwann, Remak,and Virchow• Explain the key points of endosymbiotic theory and cite the evidence that supports this concept• Explain the contributions of Semmelweis, Snow, Pasteur, Lister, and Koch to the development of germ theoryWhile some scientists were arguing over the theory of spontaneous generation, other scientists were makingdiscoveries leading to a better understanding of what we now call the cell theory. Modern cell theory has two basictenets:• All cells only come from other cells (the principle of biogenesis).• Cells are the fundamental units of organisms.Today, these tenets are fundamental to our understanding of life on earth. However, modern cell theory grew out ofthe collective work of many scientists.The Origins of Cell TheoryThe English scientist Robert Hooke first used the term “cells” in 1665 to describe the small chambers within corkthat he observed under a microscope of his own design. To Hooke, thin sections of cork resembled “Honey-comb,” or“small Boxes or Bladders of Air.” He noted that each “Cavern, Bubble, or Cell” was distinct from the others (Figure3.5). At the time, Hooke was not aware that the cork cells were long dead and, therefore, lacked the internal structuresfound within living cells.Figure 3.5 Robert Hooke (1635–1703) was the first to describe cells based upon his microscopic observations ofcork. This illustration was published in his work Micrographia.Despite Hooke’s early description of cells, their significance as the fundamental unit of life was not yet recognized.Nearly 200 years later, in 1838, Matthias Schleiden (1804–1881), a German botanist who made extensive microscopicobservations of plant tissues, described them as being composed of cells. Visualizing plant cells was relatively easybecause plant cells are clearly separated by their thick cell walls. Schleiden believed that cells formed throughcrystallization, rather than cell division.Theodor Schwann (1810–1882), a noted German physiologist, made similar microscopic observations of animaltissue. In 1839, after a conversation with Schleiden, Schwann realized that similarities existed between plant and94 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5animal tissues. This laid the foundation for the idea that cells are the fundamental components of plants and animals.In the 1850s, two Polish scientists living in Germany pushed this idea further, culminating in what we recognizetoday as the modern cell theory. In 1852, Robert Remak (1815–1865), a prominent neurologist and embryologist,published convincing evidence that cells are derived from other cells as a result of cell division. However, thisidea was questioned by many in the scientific community. Three years later, Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902), a wellrespectedpathologist, published an editorial essay entitled “Cellular Pathology,” which popularized the concept ofcell theory using the Latin phrase omnis cellula a cellula (“all cells arise from cells”), which is essentially the secondtenet of modern cell theory.[5] Given the similarity of Virchow’s work to Remak’s, there is some controversy as towhich scientist should receive credit for articulating cell theory. See the following Eye on Ethics feature for moreabout this controversy.Science and PlagiarismRudolf Virchow, a prominent, Polish-born, German scientist, is often remembered as the “Father of Pathology.”Well known for innovative approaches, he was one of the first to determine the causes of various diseases byexamining their effects on tissues and organs. He was also among the first to use animals in his research and,as a result of his work, he was the first to name numerous diseases and created many other medical terms.Over the course of his career, he published more than 2,000 papers and headed various important medicalfacilities, including the Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a prominent Berlin hospital and medical school.But he is, perhaps, best remembered for his 1855 editorial essay titled “Cellular Pathology,” published in Archivfür Pathologische Anatomie und Physiologie, a journal that Virchow himself cofounded and still exists today.Despite his significant scientific legacy, there is some controversy regarding this essay, in which Virchowproposed the central tenet of modern cell theory—that all cells arise from other cells. Robert Remak, a formercolleague who worked in the same laboratory as Virchow at the University of Berlin, had published the sameidea 3 years before. Though it appears Virchow was familiar with Remak’s work, he neglected to creditRemak’s ideas in his essay. When Remak wrote a letter to Virchow pointing out similarities between Virchow’sideas and his own, Virchow was dismissive. In 1858, in the preface to one of his books, Virchow wrote that his1855 publication was just an editorial piece, not a scientific paper, and thus there was no need to cite Remak’swork.By today’s standards, Virchow’s editorial piece would certainly be considered an act of plagiarism, since hepresented Remak’s ideas as his own. However, in the 19th century, standards for academic integrity weremuch less clear. Virchow’s strong reputation, coupled with the fact that Remak was a Jew in a somewhat anti-Semitic political climate, shielded him from any significant repercussions. Today, the process of peer reviewand the ease of access to the scientific literature help discourage plagiarism. Although scientists are stillmotivated to publish original ideas that advance scientific knowledge, those who would consider plagiarizingare well aware of the serious consequences.In academia, plagiarism represents the theft of both individual thought and research—an offense that candestroy reputations and end careers.[6] [7] [8] [9]Eye on Ethics5. M. Schultz. “Rudolph Virchow.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 14 no. 9 (2008):1480–1481.6. B. Kisch. “Forgotten Leaders in Modern Medicine, Valentin, Gouby, Remak, Auerbach.” Transactions of the American PhilosophicalSociety 44 (1954):139–317.7. H. Harris. The Birth of the Cell. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000:133.8. C. Webster (ed.). Biology, Medicine and Society 1840-1940. Cambridge, UK; Cambridge University Press, 1981:118–119.9. C. Zuchora-Walske. Key Discoveries in Life Science. Minneapolis, MN: Lerner Publishing, 2015:12–13.Chapter 3 | The Cell 95Figure 3.6 (a) Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902) popularized the cell theory in an 1855 essay entitled “CellularPathology.” (b) The idea that all cells originate from other cells was first published in 1852 by hiscontemporary and former colleague Robert Remak (1815–1865).• What are the key points of the cell theory?• What contributions did Rudolf Virchow and Robert Remak make to the development of the cell theory?Endosymbiotic TheoryAs scientists were making progress toward understanding the role of cells in plant and animal tissues, others wereexamining the structures within the cells themselves. In 1831, Scottish botanist Robert Brown (1773–1858) was thefirst to describe observations of nuclei, which he observed in plant cells. Then, in the early 1880s, German botanistAndreas Schimper (1856–1901) was the first to describe the chloroplasts of plant cells, identifying their role in starchformation during photosynthesis and noting that they divided independent of the nucleus.Based upon the chloroplasts’ ability to reproduce independently, Russian botanist Konstantin Mereschkowski(1855–1921) suggested in 1905 that chloroplasts may have originated from ancestral photosynthetic bacteria livingsymbiotically inside a eukaryotic cell. He proposed a similar origin for the nucleus of plant cells. This was the firstarticulation of the endosymbiotic hypothesis, and would explain how eukaryotic cells evolved from ancestral bacteria.Mereschkowski’s endosymbiotic hypothesis was furthered by American anatomist Ivan Wallin (1883–1969), whobegan to experimentally examine the similarities between mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria—in other words,to put the endosymbiotic hypothesis to the test using objective investigation. Wallin published a series of papers inthe 1920s supporting the endosymbiotic hypothesis, including a 1926 publication co-authored with Mereschkowski.Wallin claimed he could culture mitochondria outside of their eukaryotic host cells. Many scientists dismissed hiscultures of mitochondria as resulting from bacterial contamination. Modern genome sequencing work supports thedissenting scientists by showing that much of the genome of mitochondria had been transferred to the host cell’snucleus, preventing the mitochondria from being able to live on their own.[10] [11]10. T. Embley, W. Martin. “Eukaryotic Evolution, Changes, and Challenges.” Nature Vol. 440 (2006):623–630.96 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Wallin’s ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis were largely ignored for the next 50 years because scientistswere unaware that these organelles contained their own DNA. However, with the discovery of mitochondrial andchloroplast DNA in the 1960s, the endosymbiotic hypothesis was resurrected. Lynn Margulis (1938–2011), anAmerican geneticist, published her ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis of the origins of mitochondria andchloroplasts in 1967.[12] In the decade leading up to her publication, advances in microscopy had allowed scientists todifferentiate prokaryotic cells from eukaryotic cells. In her publication, Margulis reviewed the literature and arguedthat the eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts are of prokaryotic origin. She presented agrowing body of microscopic, genetic, molecular biology, fossil, and geological data to support her claims.Again, this hypothesis was not initially popular, but mounting genetic evidence due to the advent of DNA sequencingsupported the endosymbiotic theory, which is now defined as the theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts aroseas a result of prokaryotic cells establishing a symbiotic relationship within a eukaryotic host (Figure 3.7). WithMargulis’ initial endosymbiotic theory gaining wide acceptance, she expanded on the theory in her 1981 bookSymbiosis in Cell Evolution. In it, she explains how endosymbiosis is a major driving factor in the evolution oforganisms. More recent genetic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis show that mitochondrial DNA and chloroplastDNA are highly related to their bacterial counterparts, both in DNA sequence and chromosome structure. However,mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast DNA are reduced compared with nuclear DNA because many of the genes havemoved from the organelles into the host cell’s nucleus. Additionally, mitochondrial and chloroplast ribosomes arestructurally similar to bacterial ribosomes, rather than to the eukaryotic ribosomes of their hosts. Last, the binaryfission of these organelles strongly resembles the binary fission of bacteria, as compared with mitosis performedby eukaryotic cells. Since Margulis’ original proposal, scientists have observed several examples of bacterialendosymbionts in modern-day eukaryotic cells. Examples include the endosymbiotic bacteria found within the gutsof certain insects, such as cockroaches,[13] and photosynthetic bacteria-like organelles found in protists.[14]11. O.G. Berg, C.G. Kurland. “Why Mitochondrial Genes Are Most Often Found in Nuclei.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 17 no. 6(2000):951–961.12. L. Sagan. “On the Origin of Mitosing Cells.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 14 no. 3 (1967):225–274.13. A.E. Douglas. “The Microbial Dimension in Insect Nutritional Ecology.” Functional Ecology 23 (2009):38–47.14. J.M. Jaynes, L.P. Vernon. “The Cyanelle of Cyanophora paradoxa: Almost a Cyanobacterial Chloroplast.” Trends in BiochemicalSciences 7 no. 1 (1982):22–24.Chapter 3 | The Cell 97Figure 3.7 According to the endosymbiotic theory, mitochondria and chloroplasts are each derived from the uptakeof bacteria. These bacteria established a symbiotic relationship with their host cell that eventually led to the bacteriaevolving into mitochondria and chloroplasts.• What does the modern endosymbiotic theory state?• What evidence supports the endosymbiotic theory?The Germ Theory of DiseasePrior to the discovery of microbes during the 17th century, other theories circulated about the origins of disease. Forexample, the ancient Greeks proposed the miasma theory, which held that disease originated from particles emanatingfrom decomposing matter, such as that in sewage or cesspits. Such particles infected humans in close proximity tothe rotting material. Diseases including the Black Death, which ravaged Europe’s population during the Middle Ages,were thought to have originated in this way.In 1546, Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro proposed, in his essay De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis, thatseed-like spores may be transferred between individuals through direct contact, exposure to contaminated clothing,or through the air. We now recognize Fracastoro as an early proponent of the germ theory of disease, which statesthat diseases may result from microbial infection. However, in the 16th century, Fracastoro’s ideas were not widelyaccepted and would be largely forgotten until the 19th century.In 1847, Hungarian obstetrician Ignaz Semmelweis (Figure 3.8) observed that mothers who gave birth in hospitalwards staffed by physicians and medical students were more likely to suffer and die from puerperal fever afterchildbirth (10%–20% mortality rate) than were mothers in wards staffed by midwives (1% mortality rate).Semmelweis observed medical students performing autopsies and then subsequently carrying out vaginalexaminations on living patients without washing their hands in between. He suspected that the students carried disease98 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5from the autopsies to the patients they examined. His suspicions were supported by the untimely death of a friend,a physician who contracted a fatal wound infection after a postmortem examination of a woman who had died of apuerperal infection. The dead physician’s wound had been caused by a scalpel used during the examination, and hissubsequent illness and death closely paralleled that of the dead patient.Although Semmelweis did not know the true cause of puerperal fever, he proposed that physicians were somehowtransferring the causative agent to their patients. He suggested that the number of puerperal fever cases could bereduced if physicians and medical students simply washed their hands with chlorinated lime water before and afterexamining every patient. When this practice was implemented, the maternal mortality rate in mothers cared for byphysicians dropped to the same 1% mortality rate observed among mothers cared for by midwives. This demonstratedthat handwashing was a very effective method for preventing disease transmission. Despite this great success, manydiscounted Semmelweis’s work at the time, and physicians were slow to adopt the simple procedure of handwashingto prevent infections in their patients because it contradicted established norms for that time period.Figure 3.8 Ignaz Semmelweis (1818–1865) was a proponent of the importance of handwashing to prevent transferof disease between patients by physicians.Around the same time Semmelweis was promoting handwashing, in 1848, British physician John Snow conductedstudies to track the source of cholera outbreaks in London. By tracing the outbreaks to two specific water sources,both of which were contaminated by sewage, Snow ultimately demonstrated that cholera bacteria were transmitted viadrinking water. Snow’s work is influential in that it represents the first known epidemiological study, and it resultedin the first known public health response to an epidemic. The work of both Semmelweis and Snow clearly refutedthe prevailing miasma theory of the day, showing that disease is not only transmitted through the air but also throughcontaminated items.Although the work of Semmelweis and Snow successfully showed the role of sanitation in preventing infectiousdisease, the cause of disease was not fully understood. The subsequent work of Louis Pasteur, Robert Koch, andJoseph Lister would further substantiate the germ theory of disease.While studying the causes of beer and wine spoilage in 1856, Pasteur discovered properties of fermentation bymicroorganisms. He had demonstrated with his swan-neck flask experiments (Figure 3.4) that airborne microbes,not spontaneous generation, were the cause of food spoilage, and he suggested that if microbes were responsible forfood spoilage and fermentation, they could also be responsible for causing infection. This was the foundation for thegerm theory of disease.Meanwhile, British surgeon Joseph Lister (Figure 3.9) was trying to determine the causes of postsurgical infections.Many physicians did not give credence to the idea that microbes on their hands, on their clothes, or in the air couldinfect patients’ surgical wounds, despite the fact that 50% of surgical patients, on average, were dying of postsurgicalinfections.[15] Lister, however, was familiar with the work of Semmelweis and Pasteur; therefore, he insisted on15. Alexander, J. Wesley. “The Contributions of Infection Control to a Century of Progress” Annals of Surgery 201:423-428, 1985.Chapter 3 | The Cell 99handwashing and extreme cleanliness during surgery. In 1867, to further decrease the incidence of postsurgical woundinfections, Lister began using carbolic acid (phenol) spray disinfectant/antiseptic during surgery. His extremelysuccessful efforts to reduce postsurgical infection caused his techniques to become a standard medical practice.A few years later, Robert Koch (Figure 3.9) proposed a series of postulates (Koch’s postulates) based on the ideathat the cause of a specific disease could be attributed to a specific microbe. Using these postulates, Koch andhis colleagues were able to definitively identify the causative pathogens of specific diseases, including anthrax,tuberculosis, and cholera. Koch’s “one microbe, one disease” concept was the culmination of the 19th century’sparadigm shift away from miasma theory and toward the germ theory of disease. Koch’s postulates are discussedmore thoroughly in How Pathogens Cause Disease.Figure 3.9 (a) Joseph Lister developed procedures for the proper care of surgical wounds and the sterilization ofsurgical equipment. (b) Robert Koch established a protocol to determine the cause of infectious disease. Bothscientists contributed significantly to the acceptance of the germ theory of disease.• Compare and contrast the miasma theory of disease with the germ theory of disease.• How did Joseph Lister’s work contribute to the debate between the miasma theory and germ theory and howdid this increase the success of medical procedures?Part 2After suffering a fever, congestion, cough, and increasing aches and pains for several days, Barbara suspectsthat she has a case of the flu. She decides to visit the health center at her university. The PA tells Barbara thather symptoms could be due to a range of diseases, such as influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia, or tuberculosis.During her physical examination, the PA notes that Barbara’s heart rate is slightly elevated. Using a pulseoximeter, a small device that clips on her finger, he finds that Barbara has hypoxemia—a lower-than-normallevel of oxygen in the blood. Using a stethoscope, the PA listens for abnormal sounds made by Barbara’s heart,lungs, and digestive system. As Barbara breathes, the PA hears a crackling sound and notes a slight shortnessof breath. He collects a sputum sample, noting the greenish color of the mucus, and orders a chest radiograph,which shows a “shadow” in the left lung. All of these signs are suggestive of pneumonia, a condition in whichClinical Focus100 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the lungs fill with mucus (Figure 3.10).Figure 3.10 This is a chest radiograph typical of pneumonia. Because X-ray images are negative images, a“shadow” is seen as a white area within the lung that should otherwise be black. In this case, the left lungshows a shadow as a result of pockets in the lung that have become filled with fluid. (credit left: modificationof work by “Christaras A”/Wikimedia Commons)• What kinds of infectious agents are known to cause pneumonia?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Chapter 3 | The Cell 101Figure 3.11 (credit “swan-neck flask”: modification of work by Wellcome Images)3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic CellsLearning Objectives• Explain the distinguishing characteristics of prokaryotic cells• Describe common cell morphologies and cellular arrangements typical of prokaryotic cells and explain howcells maintain their morphology• Describe internal and external structures of prokaryotic cells in terms of their physical structure, chemicalstructure, and function• Compare the distinguishing characteristics of bacterial and archaeal cellsCell theory states that the cell is the fundamental unit of life. However, cells vary significantly in size, shape, structure,and function. At the simplest level of construction, all cells possess a few fundamental components. These includecytoplasm (a gel-like substance composed of water and dissolved chemicals needed for growth), which is containedwithin a plasma membrane (also called a cell membrane or cytoplasmic membrane); one or more chromosomes,which contain the genetic blueprints of the cell; and ribosomes, organelles used for the production of proteins.Beyond these basic components, cells can vary greatly between organisms, and even within the same multicellularorganism. The two largest categories of cells—prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells—are defined by majordifferences in several cell structures. Prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane102 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5and generally have a single, circular chromosome located in a nucleoid. Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus surroundedby a complex nuclear membrane that contains multiple, rod-shaped chromosomes.[16]All plant cells and animal cells are eukaryotic. Some microorganisms are composed of prokaryotic cells, whereasothers are composed of eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic microorganisms are classified within the domains Archaea andBacteria, whereas eukaryotic organisms are classified within the domain Eukarya.The structures inside a cell are analogous to the organs inside a human body, with unique structures suited to specificfunctions. Some of the structures found in prokaryotic cells are similar to those found in some eukaryotic cells; othersare unique to prokaryotes. Although there are some exceptions, eukaryotic cells tend to be larger than prokaryoticcells. The comparatively larger size of eukaryotic cells dictates the need to compartmentalize various chemicalprocesses within different areas of the cell, using complex membrane-bound organelles. In contrast, prokaryoticcells generally lack membrane-bound organelles; however, they often contain inclusions that compartmentalizetheir cytoplasm. Figure 3.12 illustrates structures typically associated with prokaryotic cells. These structures aredescribed in more detail in the next section.Figure 3.12 A typical prokaryotic cell contains a cell membrane, chromosomal DNA that is concentrated in anucleoid, ribosomes, and a cell wall. Some prokaryotic cells may also possess flagella, pili, fimbriae, and capsules.Common Cell Morphologies and ArrangementsIndividual cells of a particular prokaryotic organism are typically similar in shape, or cell morphology. Althoughthousands of prokaryotic organisms have been identified, only a handful of cell morphologies are commonly seenmicroscopically. Figure 3.13 names and illustrates cell morphologies commonly found in prokaryotic cells. Inaddition to cellular shape, prokaryotic cells of the same species may group together in certain distinctive arrangementsdepending on the plane of cell division. Some common arrangements are shown in Figure 3.14.16. Y.-H.M. Chan, W.F. Marshall. “Scaling Properties of Cell and Organelle Size.” Organogenesis 6 no. 2 (2010):88–96.Chapter 3 | The Cell 103Figure 3.13 (credit “Coccus” micrograph: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Centers for Disease Controland Prevention; credit “Coccobacillus” micrograph: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Controland Prevention; credit “Spirochete” micrograph: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)104 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.14In most prokaryotic cells, morphology is maintained by the cell wall in combination with cytoskeletal elements.The cell wall is a structure found in most prokaryotes and some eukaryotes; it envelopes the cell membrane,protecting the cell from changes in osmotic pressure (Figure 3.15). Osmotic pressure occurs because of differencesin the concentration of solutes on opposing sides of a semipermeable membrane. Water is able to pass through asemipermeable membrane, but solutes (dissolved molecules like salts, sugars, and other compounds) cannot. Whenthe concentration of solutes is greater on one side of the membrane, water diffuses across the membrane fromthe side with the lower concentration (more water) to the side with the higher concentration (less water) until theconcentrations on both sides become equal. This diffusion of water is called osmosis, and it can cause extremeosmotic pressure on a cell when its external environment changes.The external environment of a cell can be described as an isotonic, hypertonic, or hypotonic medium. In an isotonicmedium, the solute concentrations inside and outside the cell are approximately equal, so there is no net movementof water across the cell membrane. In a hypertonic medium, the solute concentration outside the cell exceeds thatinside the cell, so water diffuses out of the cell and into the external medium. In a hypotonic medium, the soluteconcentration inside the cell exceeds that outside of the cell, so water will move by osmosis into the cell. This causesthe cell to swell and potentially lyse, or burst.The degree to which a particular cell is able to withstand changes in osmotic pressure is called tonicity. Cells thathave a cell wall are better able to withstand subtle changes in osmotic pressure and maintain their shape. In hypertonicenvironments, cells that lack a cell wall can become dehydrated, causing crenation, or shriveling of the cell; theplasma membrane contracts and appears scalloped or notched (Figure 3.15). By contrast, cells that possess a cellwall undergo plasmolysis rather than crenation. In plasmolysis, the plasma membrane contracts and detaches fromthe cell wall, and there is a decrease in interior volume, but the cell wall remains intact, thus allowing the cell tomaintain some shape and integrity for a period of time (Figure 3.16). Likewise, cells that lack a cell wall are moreprone to lysis in hypotonic environments. The presence of a cell wall allows the cell to maintain its shape and integrityChapter 3 | The Cell 105for a longer time before lysing (Figure 3.16).Figure 3.15 In cells that lack a cell wall, changes in osmotic pressure can lead to crenation in hypertonicenvironments or cell lysis in hypotonic environments.Figure 3.16 In prokaryotic cells, the cell wall provides some protection against changes in osmotic pressure,allowing it to maintain its shape longer. The cell membrane is typically attached to the cell wall in an isotonic medium(left). In a hypertonic medium, the cell membrane detaches from the cell wall and contracts (plasmolysis) as waterleaves the cell. In a hypotonic medium (right), the cell wall prevents the cell membrane from expanding to the point ofbursting, although lysis will eventually occur if too much water is absorbed.106 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain the difference between cell morphology and arrangement.• What advantages do cell walls provide prokaryotic cells?The NucleoidAll cellular life has a DNA genome organized into one or more chromosomes. Prokaryotic chromosomes are typicallycircular, haploid (unpaired), and not bound by a complex nuclear membrane. Prokaryotic DNA and DNA-associatedproteins are concentrated within the nucleoid region of the cell (Figure 3.17). In general, prokaryotic DNA interactswith nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs) that assist in the organization and packaging of the chromosome. Inbacteria, NAPs function similar to histones, which are the DNA-organizing proteins found in eukaryotic cells. Inarchaea, the nucleoid is organized by either NAPs or histone-like DNA organizing proteins.Figure 3.17 The nucleoid region (the area enclosed by the green dashed line) is a condensed area of DNA foundwithin prokaryotic cells. Because of the density of the area, it does not readily stain and appears lighter in color whenviewed with a transmission electron microscope.PlasmidsProkaryotic cells may also contain extrachromosomal DNA, or DNA that is not part of the chromosome. Thisextrachromosomal DNA is found in plasmids, which are small, circular, double-stranded DNA molecules. Cells thathave plasmids often have hundreds of them within a single cell. Plasmids are more commonly found in bacteria;however, plasmids have been found in archaea and eukaryotic organisms. Plasmids often carry genes that conferadvantageous traits such as antibiotic resistance; thus, they are important to the survival of the organism. We willdiscuss plasmids in more detail in Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics.RibosomesAll cellular life synthesizes proteins, and organisms in all three domains of life possess ribosomes, structuresresponsible for protein synthesis. However, ribosomes in each of the three domains are structurally different.Ribosomes, themselves, are constructed from proteins, along with ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Prokaryotic ribosomesare found in the cytoplasm. They are called 70S ribosomes because they have a size of 70S (Figure 3.18), whereaseukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosomes have a size of 80S. (The S stands for Svedberg unit, a measure of sedimentationin an ultracentrifuge, which is based on size, shape, and surface qualities of the structure being analyzed). Althoughthey are the same size, bacterial and archaeal ribosomes have different proteins and rRNA molecules, and the archaealversions are more similar to their eukaryotic counterparts than to those found in bacteria.Chapter 3 | The Cell 107Figure 3.18 Prokaryotic ribosomes (70S) are composed of two subunits: the 30S (small subunit) and the 50S (largesubunit), each of which are composed of protein and rRNA components.InclusionsAs single-celled organisms living in unstable environments, some prokaryotic cells have the ability to store excessnutrients within cytoplasmic structures called inclusions. Storing nutrients in a polymerized form is advantageousbecause it reduces the buildup of osmotic pressure that occurs as a cell accumulates solutes. Various types ofinclusions store glycogen and starches, which contain carbon that cells can access for energy. Volutin granules,also called metachromatic granules because of their staining characteristics, are inclusions that store polymerizedinorganic phosphate that can be used in metabolism and assist in the formation of biofilms. Microbes known tocontain volutin granules include the archaea Methanosarcina, the bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae, and theunicellular eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas. Sulfur granules, another type of inclusion, are found in sulfur bacteriaof the genus Thiobacillus; these granules store elemental sulfur, which the bacteria use for metabolism.Occasionally, certain types of inclusions are surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer embedded with protein.Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), which can be produced by species of Bacillus and Pseudomonas, is an example ofan inclusion that displays this type of monolayer structure. Industrially, PHB has also been used as a source ofbiodegradable polymers for bioplastics. Several different types of inclusions are shown in Figure 3.19.108 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.19 Prokaryotic cells may have various types of inclusions. (a) A transmission electron micrograph ofpolyhydroxybutryrate lipid droplets. (b) A light micrograph of volutin granules. (c) A phase-contrast micrograph ofsulfur granules. (d) A transmission electron micrograph of gas vacuoles. (e) A transmission electron micrograph ofmagnetosomes. (credit b, c, d: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Some prokaryotic cells have other types of inclusions that serve purposes other than nutrient storage. For example,some prokaryotic cells produce gas vacuoles, accumulations of small, protein-lined vesicles of gas. These gasvacuoles allow the prokaryotic cells that synthesize them to alter their buoyancy so that they can adjust their locationin the water column. Magnetotactic bacteria, such as Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum, contain magnetosomes,which are inclusions of magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide surrounded by a lipid layer. These allow cells to align alonga magnetic field, aiding their movement (Figure 3.19). Cyanobacteria such as Anabaena cylindrica and bacteriasuch as Halothiobacillus neapolitanus produce carboxysome inclusions. Carboxysomes are composed of outershells of thousands of protein subunits. Their interior is filled with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase(RuBisCO) and carbonic anhydrase. Both of these compounds are used for carbon metabolism. Some prokaryoticcells also possess carboxysomes that sequester functionally related enzymes in one location. These structures areconsidered proto-organelles because they compartmentalize important compounds or chemical reactions, much likemany eukaryotic organelles.EndosporesBacterial cells are generally observed as vegetative cells, but some genera of bacteria have the ability to formendospores, structures that essentially protect the bacterial genome in a dormant state when environmental conditionsare unfavorable. Endospores (not to be confused with the reproductive spores formed by fungi) allow some bacterialcells to survive long periods without food or water, as well as exposure to chemicals, extreme temperatures, and evenradiation. Table 3.1 compares the characteristics of vegetative cells and endospores.Chapter 3 | The Cell 109Characteristics of Vegetative Cells versus EndosporesVegetative Cells EndosporesSensitive to extreme temperaturesand radiationResistant to extreme temperatures and radiationGram-positive Do not absorb Gram stain, only special endospore stains (see StainingMicroscopic Specimens)Normal water content andenzymatic activityDehydrated; no metabolic activityCapable of active growth andmetabolismDormant; no growth or metabolic activityTable 3.1The process by which vegetative cells transform into endospores is called sporulation, and it generally begins whennutrients become depleted or environmental conditions become otherwise unfavorable (Figure 3.20). The processbegins with the formation of a septum in the vegetative bacterial cell. The septum divides the cell asymmetrically,separating a DNA forespore from the mother cell. The forespore, which will form the core of the endospore, isessentially a copy of the cell’s chromosomes, and is separated from the mother cell by a second membrane. A cortexgradually forms around the forespore by laying down layers of calcium and dipicolinic acid between membranes. Aprotein spore coat then forms around the cortex while the DNA of the mother cell disintegrates. Further maturation ofthe endospore occurs with the formation of an outermost exosporium. The endospore is released upon disintegrationof the mother cell, completing sporulation.110 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.20 (a) Sporulation begins following asymmetric cell division. The forespore becomes surrounded by adouble layer of membrane, a cortex, and a protein spore coat, before being released as a mature endospore upondisintegration of the mother cell. (b) An electron micrograph of a Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans endospore.(c) These Bacillus spp. cells are undergoing sporulation. The endospores have been visualized using MalachiteGreen spore stain. (credit b: modification of work by Jonathan Eisen)Endospores of certain species have been shown to persist in a dormant state for extended periods of time, up tothousands of years.[17] However, when living conditions improve, endospores undergo germination, reentering avegetative state. After germination, the cell becomes metabolically active again and is able to carry out all of itsnormal functions, including growth and cell division.Not all bacteria have the ability to form endospores; however, there are a number of clinically significant endosporeforminggram-positive bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium. These include B. anthracis, the causativeagent of anthrax, which produces endospores capable of survive for many decades[18]; C. tetani (causes tetanus);C. difficile (causes pseudomembranous colitis); C. perfringens (causes gas gangrene); and C. botulinum (causesbotulism). Pathogens such as these are particularly difficult to combat because their endospores are so hard to kill.Special sterilization methods for endospore-forming bacteria are discussed in Control of Microbial Growth.• What is an inclusion?• What is the function of an endospore?17. F. Rothfuss, M Bender, R Conrad. “Survival and Activity of Bacteria in a Deep, Aged Lake Sediment (Lake Constance).” MicrobialEcology 33 no. 1 (1997):69–77.18. R. Sinclair et al. “Persistence of Category A Select Agents in the Environment.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 74 no. 3(2008):555–563.Chapter 3 | The Cell 111Plasma MembraneStructures that enclose the cytoplasm and internal structures of the cell are known collectively as the cell envelope.In prokaryotic cells, the structures of the cell envelope vary depending on the type of cell and organism. Most(but not all) prokaryotic cells have a cell wall, but the makeup of this cell wall varies. All cells (prokaryoticand eukaryotic) have a plasma membrane (also called cytoplasmic membrane or cell membrane) that exhibitsselective permeability, allowing some molecules to enter or leave the cell while restricting the passage of others.The structure of the plasma membrane is often described in terms of the fluid mosaic model, which refers to theability of membrane components to move fluidly within the plane of the membrane, as well as the mosaic-likecomposition of the components, which include a diverse array of lipid and protein components (Figure 3.21). Theplasma membrane structure of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell types is a bilayer composed mainly of phospholipidsformed with ester linkages and proteins. These phospholipids and proteins have the ability to move laterally withinthe plane of the membranes as well as between the two phospholipid layers.Figure 3.21 The bacterial plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with a variety of embedded proteins thatperform various functions for the cell. Note the presence of glycoproteins and glycolipids, whose carbohydratecomponents extend out from the surface of the cell. The abundance and arrangement of these proteins and lipids canvary greatly between species.Archaeal membranes are fundamentally different from bacterial and eukaryotic membranes in a few significant ways.First, archaeal membrane phospholipids are formed with ether linkages, in contrast to the ester linkages found inbacterial or eukaryotic cell membranes. Second, archaeal phospholipids have branched chains, whereas those ofbacterial and eukaryotic cells are straight chained. Finally, although some archaeal membranes can be formed ofbilayers like those found in bacteria and eukaryotes, other archaeal plasma membranes are lipid monolayers.Proteins on the cell’s surface are important for a variety of functions, including cell-to-cell communication, andsensing environmental conditions and pathogenic virulence factors. Membrane proteins and phospholipids mayhave carbohydrates (sugars) associated with them and are called glycoproteins or glycolipids, respectively. Theseglycoprotein and glycolipid complexes extend out from the surface of the cell, allowing the cell to interact with theexternal environment (Figure 3.21). Glycoproteins and glycolipids in the plasma membrane can vary considerablyin chemical composition among archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes, allowing scientists to use them to characterizeunique species.112 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Plasma membranes from different cells types also contain unique phospholipids, which contain fatty acids. Asdescribed in Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms, phospholipid-derived fatty acid analysis(PLFA) profiles can be used to identify unique types of cells based on differences in fatty acids. Archaea, bacteria,and eukaryotes each have a unique PFLA profile.Membrane Transport MechanismsOne of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is to control the transport of molecules into andout of the cell. Internal conditions must be maintained within a certain range despite any changes in the externalenvironment. The transport of substances across the plasma membrane allows cells to do so.Cells use various modes of transport across the plasma membrane. For example, molecules moving from a higherconcentration to a lower concentration with the concentration gradient are transported by simple diffusion, also knownas passive transport (Figure 3.22). Some small molecules, like carbon dioxide, may cross the membrane bilayerdirectly by simple diffusion. However, charged molecules, as well as large molecules, need the help of carriers orchannels in the membrane. These structures ferry molecules across the membrane, a process known as facilitateddiffusion (Figure 3.23).Active transport occurs when cells move molecules across their membrane against concentration gradients (Figure3.24). A major difference between passive and active transport is that active transport requires adenosine triphosphate(ATP) or other forms of energy to move molecules “uphill.” Therefore, active transport structures are often called“pumps.”Figure 3.22 Simple diffusion down a concentration gradient directly across the phospholipid bilayer. (credit:modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Chapter 3 | The Cell 113Figure 3.23 Facilitated diffusion down a concentration gradient through a membrane protein. (credit: modification ofwork by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Figure 3.24 Active transport against a concentration gradient via a membrane pump that requires energy. (credit:modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Group translocation also transports substances into bacterial cells. In this case, as a molecule moves into a cellagainst its concentration gradient, it is chemically modified so that it does not require transport against an unfavorableconcentration gradient. A common example of this is the bacterial phosphotransferase system, a series of carriers thatphosphorylates (i.e., adds phosphate ions to) glucose or other sugars upon entry into cells. Since the phosphorylationof sugars is required during the early stages of sugar metabolism, the phosphotransferase system is considered to bean energy neutral system.Photosynthetic Membrane StructuresSome prokaryotic cells, namely cyanobacteria and photosynthetic bacteria, have membrane structures that enablethem to perform photosynthesis. These structures consist of an infolding of the plasma membrane that enclosesphotosynthetic pigments such as green chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls. In cyanobacteria, these membranestructures are called thylakoids; in photosynthetic bacteria, they are called chromatophores, lamellae, or chlorosomes.Cell WallThe primary function of the cell wall is to protect the cell from harsh conditions in the outside environment. When114 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5present, there are notable similarities and differences among the cell walls of archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes.The major component of bacterial cell walls is called peptidoglycan (or murein); it is only found in bacteria.Structurally, peptidoglycan resembles a layer of meshwork or fabric (Figure 3.25). Each layer is composed of longchains of alternating molecules of N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM). The structureof the long chains has significant two-dimensional tensile strength due to the formation of peptide bridges thatconnect NAG and NAM within each peptidoglycan layer. In gram-negative bacteria, tetrapeptide chains extendingfrom each NAM unit are directly cross-linked, whereas in gram-positive bacteria, these tetrapeptide chains are linkedby pentaglycine cross-bridges. Peptidoglycan subunits are made inside of the bacterial cell and then exported andassembled in layers, giving the cell its shape.Since peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria, many antibiotic drugs are designed to interfere with peptidoglycansynthesis, weakening the cell wall and making bacterial cells more susceptible to the effects of osmotic pressure(see Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs). In addition, certain cells of the human immune system are able“recognize” bacterial pathogens by detecting peptidoglycan on the surface of a bacterial cell; these cells then engulfand destroy the bacterial cell, using enzymes such as lysozyme, which breaks down and digests the peptidoglycan intheir cell walls (see Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis).Figure 3.25 Peptidoglycan is composed of polymers of alternating NAM and NAG subunits, which are cross-linkedby peptide bridges linking NAM subunits from various glycan chains. This provides the cell wall with tensile strengthin two dimensions.The Gram staining protocol (see Staining Microscopic Specimens) is used to differentiate two commontypes of cell wall structures (Figure 3.26). Gram-positive cells have a cell wall consisting of many layers ofpeptidoglycan totaling 30–100 nm in thickness. These peptidoglycan layers are commonly embedded with teichoicacids (TAs), carbohydrate chains that extend through and beyond the peptidoglycan layer.[19] TA is thought to stabilizepeptidoglycan by increasing its rigidity. TA also plays a role in the ability of pathogenic gram-positive bacteria suchas Streptococcus to bind to certain proteins on the surface of host cells, enhancing their ability to cause infection. Inaddition to peptidoglycan and TAs, bacteria of the family Mycobacteriaceae have an external layer of waxy mycolicacids in their cell wall; as described in Staining Microscopic Specimens, these bacteria are referred to as acidfast,since acid-fast stains must be used to penetrate the mycolic acid layer for purposes of microscopy (Figure 3.27).19. T.J. Silhavy, D. Kahne, S. Walker. “The Bacterial Cell Envelope.” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 2 no. 5 (2010):a000414.Chapter 3 | The Cell 115Figure 3.26 Bacteria contain two common cell wall structural types. Gram-positive cell walls are structurally simple,containing a thick layer of peptidoglycan with embedded teichoic acid external to the plasma membrane.[20] Gramnegativecell walls are structurally more complex, containing three layers: the inner membrane, a thin layer ofpeptidoglycan, and an outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharide. (credit: modification of work by“Franciscosp2”/Wikimedia Commons)Figure 3.27 (a) Some gram-positive bacteria, including members of the Mycobacteriaceae, produce waxy mycolicacids found exterior to their structurally-distinct peptidoglycan. (b) The acid-fast staining protocol detects thepresence of cell walls that are rich in mycolic acid. Acid-fast cells are stained red by carbolfuschin. (credit a:modification of work by “Franciscosp2”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Gram-negative cells have a much thinner layer of peptidoglycan (no more than about 4 nm thick[21]) than grampositivecells, and the overall structure of their cell envelope is more complex. In gram-negative cells, a gel-likematrix occupies the periplasmic space between the cell wall and the plasma membrane, and there is a secondlipid bilayer called the outer membrane, which is external to the peptidoglycan layer (Figure 3.26). This outermembrane is attached to the peptidoglycan by murein lipoprotein. The outer leaflet of the outer membrane containsthe molecule lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which functions as an endotoxin in infections involving gram-negativebacteria, contributing to symptoms such as fever, hemorrhaging, and septic shock. Each LPS molecule is composed20. B. Zuber et al. “Granular Layer in the Periplasmic Space of Gram-Positive Bacteria and Fine Structures of Enterococcus gallinarum andStreptococcus gordonii Septa Revealed by Cryo-Electron Microscopy of Vitreous Sections.” Journal of Bacteriology 188 no. 18(2006):6652–666021. L. Gana, S. Chena, G.J. Jensena. “Molecular Organization of Gram-Negative Peptidoglycan.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences of the United States of America 105 no. 48 (2008):18953–18957.116 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5of Lipid A, a core polysaccharide, and an O side chain that is composed of sugar-like molecules that comprise theexternal face of the LPS (Figure 3.28). The composition of the O side chain varies between different species andstrains of bacteria. Parts of the O side chain called antigens can be detected using serological or immunological teststo identify specific pathogenic strains like Escherichia coli O157:H7, a deadly strain of bacteria that causes bloodydiarrhea and kidney failure.Figure 3.28 The outer membrane of a gram-negative bacterial cell contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a toxincomposed of Lipid A embedded in the outer membrane, a core polysaccharide, and the O side chain.Archaeal cell wall structure differs from that of bacteria in several significant ways. First, archaeal cell walls do notcontain peptidoglycan; instead, they contain a similar polymer called pseudopeptidoglycan (pseudomurein) in whichNAM is replaced with a different subunit. Other archaea may have a layer of glycoproteins or polysaccharides thatserves as the cell wall instead of pseudopeptidoglycan. Last, as is the case with some bacterial species, there are a fewarchaea that appear to lack cell walls entirely.Glycocalyces and S-LayersAlthough most prokaryotic cells have cell walls, some may have additional cell envelope structures exterior to thecell wall, such as glycocalyces and S-layers. A glycocalyx is a sugar coat, of which there are two important types:capsules and slime layers. A capsule is an organized layer located outside of the cell wall and usually composed ofpolysaccharides or proteins (Figure 3.29). A slime layer is a less tightly organized layer that is only loosely attachedto the cell wall and can be more easily washed off. Slime layers may be composed of polysaccharides, glycoproteins,or glycolipids.Glycocalyces allows cells to adhere to surfaces, aiding in the formation of biofilms (colonies of microbes that form inlayers on surfaces). In nature, most microbes live in mixed communities within biofilms, partly because the biofilmaffords them some level of protection. Biofilms generally hold water like a sponge, preventing desiccation. Theyalso protect cells from predation and hinder the action of antibiotics and disinfectants. All of these properties areadvantageous to the microbes living in a biofilm, but they present challenges in a clinical setting, where the goal isChapter 3 | The Cell 117often to eliminate microbes.Figure 3.29 (a) Capsules are a type of glycocalyx composed of an organized layer of polysaccharides. (b) A capsulestain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a bacterial pathogen capable of causing many different types of infections inhumans. (credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)The ability to produce a capsule can contribute to a microbe’s pathogenicity (ability to cause disease) becausethe capsule can make it more difficult for phagocytic cells (such as white blood cells) to engulf and kill themicroorganism. Streptococcus pneumoniae, for example, produces a capsule that is well known to aid in thisbacterium’s pathogenicity. As explained in Staining Microscopic specimens, capsules are difficult to stain formicroscopy; negative staining techniques are typically used.An S-layer is another type of cell envelope structure; it is composed of a mixture of structural proteins andglycoproteins. In bacteria, S-layers are found outside the cell wall, but in some archaea, the S-layer serves as the cellwall. The exact function of S-layers is not entirely understood, and they are difficult to study; but available evidencesuggests that they may play a variety of functions in different prokaryotic cells, such as helping the cell withstandosmotic pressure and, for certain pathogens, interacting with the host immune system.Part 3After diagnosing Barbara with pneumonia, the PA writes her a prescription for amoxicillin, a commonlyprescribedtype of penicillin derivative. More than a week later, despite taking the full course as directed,Barbara still feels weak and is not fully recovered, although she is still able to get through her daily activities.She returns to the health center for a follow-up visit.Many types of bacteria, fungi, and viruses can cause pneumonia. Amoxicillin targets the peptidoglycan ofbacterial cell walls. Since the amoxicillin has not resolved Barbara’s symptoms, the PA concludes that thecausative agent probably lacks peptidoglycan, meaning that the pathogen could be a virus, a fungus, ora bacterium that lacks peptidoglycan. Another possibility is that the pathogen is a bacterium containingpeptidoglycan but has developed resistance to amoxicillin.• How can the PA definitively identify the cause of Barbara’s pneumonia?• What form of treatment should the PA prescribe, given that the amoxicillin was ineffective?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus118 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Filamentous AppendagesMany bacterial cells have protein appendages embedded within their cell envelopes that extend outward, allowinginteraction with the environment. These appendages can attach to other surfaces, transfer DNA, or provide movement.Filamentous appendages include fimbriae, pili, and flagella.Fimbriae and PiliFimbriae and pili are structurally similar and, because differentiation between the two is problematic, these termsare often used interchangeably.[22] [23] The term fimbriae commonly refers to short bristle-like proteins projectingfrom the cell surface by the hundreds. Fimbriae enable a cell to attach to surfaces and to other cells. For pathogenicbacteria, adherence to host cells is important for colonization, infectivity, and virulence. Adherence to surfaces is alsoimportant in biofilm formation.The term pili (singular: pilus) commonly refers to longer, less numerous protein appendages that aid in attachment tosurfaces (Figure 3.30). A specific type of pilus, called the F pilus or sex pilus, is important in the transfer of DNAbetween bacterial cells, which occurs between members of the same generation when two cells physically transfer orexchange parts of their respective genomes (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity).Figure 3.30 Bacteria may produce two different types of protein appendages that aid in surface attachment.Fimbriae typically are more numerous and shorter, whereas pili (shown here) are longer and less numerous per cell.(credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Group A StrepBefore the structure and function of the various components of the bacterial cell envelope were wellunderstood, scientists were already using cell envelope characteristics to classify bacteria. In 1933, RebeccaLancefield proposed a method for serotyping various β-hemolytic strains of Streptococcus species using anagglutination assay, a technique using the clumping of bacteria to detect specific cell-surface antigens. In doingso, Lancefield discovered that one group of S. pyogenes, found in Group A, was associated with a variety ofhuman diseases. She determined that various strains of Group A strep could be distinguished from each otherbased on variations in specific cell surface proteins that she named M proteins.Today, more than 80 different strains of Group A strep have been identified based on M proteins. Variousstrains of Group A strep are associated with a wide variety of human infections, including streptococcalMicro Connections22. J.A. Garnetta et al. “Structural Insights Into the Biogenesis and Biofilm Formation by the Escherichia coli Common Pilus.” Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 no. 10 (2012):3950–3955.23. T. Proft, E.N. Baker. “Pili in Gram-Negative and Gram-Positive Bacteria—Structure, Assembly and Their Role in Disease.” Cellularand Molecular Life Sciences 66 (2009):613.Chapter 3 | The Cell 119pharyngitis (strep throat), impetigo, toxic shock syndrome, scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, and necrotizingfasciitis. The M protein is an important virulence factor for Group A strep, helping these strains evade theimmune system. Changes in M proteins appear to alter the infectivity of a particular strain of Group A strep.FlagellaFlagella are structures used by cells to move in aqueous environments. Bacterial flagella act like propellers. They arestiff spiral filaments composed of flagellin protein subunits that extend outward from the cell and spin in solution.The basal body is the motor for the flagellum and is embedded in the plasma membrane (Figure 3.31). A hookregion connects the basal body to the filament. Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have different basal bodyconfigurations due to differences in cell wall structure.Different types of motile bacteria exhibit different arrangements of flagella (Figure 3.32). A bacterium with asingular flagellum, typically located at one end of the cell (polar), is said to have a monotrichous flagellum. Anexample of a monotrichously flagellated bacterial pathogen is Vibrio cholerae, the gram-negative bacterium thatcauses cholera. Cells with amphitrichous flagella have a flagellum or tufts of flagella at each end. An example isSpirillum minor, the cause of spirillary (Asian) rat-bite fever or sodoku. Cells with lophotrichous flagella have a tuftat one end of the cell. The gram-negative bacillus Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen known forcausing many infections, including “swimmer’s ear” and burn wound infections, has lophotrichous flagella. Flagellathat cover the entire surface of a bacterial cell are called peritrichous flagella. The gram-negative bacterium E. colishows a peritrichous arrangement of flagella.Figure 3.31 The basic structure of a bacterial flagellum consists of a basal body, hook, and filament. The basal bodycomposition and arrangement differ between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. (credit: modification of workby “LadyofHats”/Mariana Ruiz Villareal)120 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.32 Flagellated bacteria may exhibit multiple arrangements of their flagella. Common arrangements includemonotrichous, amphitrichous, lophotrichous, or peritrichous.Directional movement depends on the configuration of the flagella. Bacteria can move in response to a variety ofenvironmental signals, including light (phototaxis), magnetic fields (magnetotaxis) using magnetosomes, and, mostcommonly, chemical gradients (chemotaxis). Purposeful movement toward a chemical attractant, like a food source,or away from a repellent, like a poisonous chemical, is achieved by increasing the length of runs and decreasing thelength of tumbles. When running, flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction, allowing the bacterial cell to moveforward. In a peritrichous bacterium, the flagella are all bundled together in a very streamlined way (Figure 3.33),allowing for efficient movement. When tumbling, flagella are splayed out while rotating in a clockwise direction,creating a looping motion and preventing meaningful forward movement but reorienting the cell toward the directionof the attractant. When an attractant exists, runs and tumbles still occur; however, the length of runs is longer, whilethe length of the tumbles is reduced, allowing overall movement toward the higher concentration of the attractant.When no chemical gradient exists, the lengths of runs and tumbles are more equal, and overall movement is morerandom (Figure 3.34).Figure 3.33 Bacteria achieve directional movement by changing the rotation of their flagella. In a cell withperitrichous flagella, the flagella bundle when they rotate in a counterclockwise direction, resulting in a run. However,when the flagella rotate in a clockwise direction, the flagella are no longer bundled, resulting in tumbles.Chapter 3 | The Cell 121Figure 3.34 Without a chemical gradient, flagellar rotation cycles between counterclockwise (run) and clockwise(tumble) with no overall directional movement. However, when a chemical gradient of an attractant exists, the lengthof runs is extended, while the length of tumbles is decreased. This leads to chemotaxis: an overall directionalmovement toward the higher concentration of the attractant.• What is the peptidoglycan layer and how does it differ between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria?• Compare and contrast monotrichous, amphitrichous, lophotrichous, and peritrichous flagella.3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic CellsLearning Objectives• Explain the distinguishing characteristics of eukaryotic cells• Describe internal and external structures of prokaryotic cells in terms of their physical structure, chemicalstructure, and function• Identify and describe structures and organelles unique to eukaryotic cells• Compare and contrast similar structures found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cellsEukaryotic organisms include protozoans, algae, fungi, plants, and animals. Some eukaryotic cells are independent,single-celled microorganisms, whereas others are part of multicellular organisms. The cells of eukaryotic organismshave several distinguishing characteristics. Above all, eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a nucleussurrounded by a complex nuclear membrane. Also, eukaryotic cells are characterized by the presence of membraneboundorganelles in the cytoplasm. Organelles such as mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgiapparatus, lysosomes, and peroxisomes are held in place by the cytoskeleton, an internal network that supports122 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5transport of intracellular components and helps maintain cell shape (Figure 3.35). The genome of eukaryoticcells is packaged in multiple, rod-shaped chromosomes as opposed to the single, circular-shaped chromosome thatcharacterizes most prokaryotic cells. Table 3.2 compares the characteristics of eukaryotic cell structures with thoseof bacteria and archaea.Figure 3.35 An illustration of a generalized, single-celled eukaryotic organism. Note that cells of eukaryoticorganisms vary greatly in terms of structure and function, and a particular cell may not have all of the structuresshown here.Summary of Cell StructuresCell Structure ProkaryotesBacteria ArchaeaEukaryotesSize ~0.5–1 μM ~0.5–1 μM ~5–20 μMSurface area-tovolumeratioHigh High LowNucleus No No YesTable 3.2Chapter 3 | The Cell 123Summary of Cell StructuresCell Structure ProkaryotesBacteria ArchaeaEukaryotesGenomecharacteristics• Single chromosome• Circular• Haploid• Lacks histones• Single chromosome• Circular• Haploid• Contains histones• Multiple chromosomes• Linear• Haploid or diploid• Contains histonesCell division Binary fission Binary fission Mitosis, meiosisMembrane lipidcomposition• Ester-linked• Straight-chain fattyacids• Bilayer• Ether-linked• Branched isoprenoids• Bilayer or monolayer• Ester-linked• Straight-chain fatty acids• Sterols• BilayerCell wallcomposition• Peptidoglycan, or• None• Pseudopeptidoglycan, or• Glycopeptide, or• Polysaccharide, or• Protein (S-layer), or• None• Cellulose (plants, somealgae)• Chitin (molluscs, insects,crustaceans, and fungi)• Silica (some algae)• Most others lack cell wallsMotilitystructuresRigid spiral flagellacomposed of flagellinRigid spiral flagella composedof archaeal flagellinsFlexible flagella and ciliacomposed of microtubulesMembraneboundorganellesNo No YesEndomembranesystemNo No Yes (ER, Golgi, lysosomes)Ribosomes 70S 70S • 80S in cytoplasm andrough ER• 70S in mitochondria,chloroplastsTable 3.2Cell MorphologiesEukaryotic cells display a wide variety of different cell morphologies. Possible shapes include spheroid, ovoid,cuboidal, cylindrical, flat, lenticular, fusiform, discoidal, crescent, ring stellate, and polygonal (Figure 3.36). Someeukaryotic cells are irregular in shape, and some are capable of changing shape. The shape of a particular type ofeukaryotic cell may be influenced by factors such as its primary function, the organization of its cytoskeleton, theviscosity of its cytoplasm, the rigidity of its cell membrane or cell wall (if it has one), and the physical pressureexerted on it by the surrounding environment and/or adjoining cells.124 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.36 Eukaryotic cells come in a variety of cell shapes. (a) Spheroid Chromulina alga. (b) Fusiform shapedTrypanosoma. (c) Bell-shaped Vorticella. (d) Ovoid Paramecium. (e) Ring-shaped Plasmodium ovale. (credit a:modification of work by NOAA; credit b, e: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Identify two differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.NucleusUnlike prokaryotic cells, in which DNA is loosely contained in the nucleoid region, eukaryotic cells possess anucleus, which is surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane that houses the DNA genome (Figure 3.37). Bycontaining the cell’s DNA, the nucleus ultimately controls all activities of the cell and also serves an essential rolein reproduction and heredity. Eukaryotic cells typically have their DNA organized into multiple linear chromosomes.The DNA within the nucleus is highly organized and condensed to fit inside the nucleus, which is accomplished bywrapping the DNA around proteins called histones.Chapter 3 | The Cell 125Figure 3.37 Eukaryotic cells have a well-defined nucleus. The nucleus of this mammalian lung cell is the large, dark,oval-shaped structure in the lower half of the image.Although most eukaryotic cells have only one nucleus, exceptions exist. For example, protozoans of the genusParamecium typically have two complete nuclei: a small nucleus that is used for reproduction (micronucleus) and alarge nucleus that directs cellular metabolism (macronucleus). Additionally, some fungi transiently form cells withtwo nuclei, called heterokaryotic cells, during sexual reproduction. Cells whose nuclei divide, but whose cytoplasmdoes not, are called coenocytes.The nucleus is bound by a complex nuclear membrane, often called the nuclear envelope, that consists of twodistinct lipid bilayers that are contiguous with each other (Figure 3.38). Despite these connections between theinner and outer membranes, each membrane contains unique lipids and proteins on its inner and outer surfaces. Thenuclear envelope contains nuclear pores, which are large, rosette-shaped protein complexes that control the movementof materials into and out of the nucleus. The overall shape of the nucleus is determined by the nuclear lamina,a meshwork of intermediate filaments found just inside the nuclear envelope membranes. Outside the nucleus,additional intermediate filaments form a looser mesh and serve to anchor the nucleus in position within the cell.Figure 3.38 In this fluorescent microscope image, all the intermediate filaments have been stained with a brightgreen fluorescent stain. The nuclear lamina is the intense bright green ring around the faint red nuclei.NucleolusThe nucleolus is a dense region within the nucleus where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) biosynthesis occurs. In addition,the nucleolus is also the site where assembly of ribosomes begins. Preribosomal complexes are assembled from rRNAand proteins in the nucleolus; they are then transported out to the cytoplasm, where ribosome assembly is completed(Figure 3.39).126 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.39 (a) The nucleolus is the dark, dense area within the nucleus. It is the site of rRNA synthesis andpreribosomal assembly. (b) Electron micrograph showing the nucleolus.RibosomesRibosomes found in eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria or chloroplasts have 70S ribosomes—the samesize as prokaryotic ribosomes. However, nonorganelle-associated ribosomes in eukaryotic cells are 80S ribosomes,composed of a 40S small subunit and a 60S large subunit. In terms of size and composition, this makes them distinctfrom the ribosomes of prokaryotic cells.The two types of nonorganelle-associated eukaryotic ribosomes are defined by their location in the cell: freeribosomes and membrane-bound ribosomes. Free ribosomes are found in the cytoplasm and serve to synthesizewater-soluble proteins; membrane-bound ribosomes are found attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum and makeproteins for insertion into the cell membrane or proteins destined for export from the cell.The differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes are clinically relevant because certain antibioticdrugs are designed to target one or the other. For example, cycloheximide targets eukaryotic action, whereaschloramphenicol targets prokaryotic ribosomes.[24] Since human cells are eukaryotic, they generally are not harmedby antibiotics that destroy the prokaryotic ribosomes in bacteria. However, sometimes negative side effects may occurbecause mitochondria in human cells contain prokaryotic ribosomes.Endomembrane SystemThe endomembrane system, unique to eukaryotic cells, is a series of membranous tubules, sacs, and flattened disksthat synthesize many cell components and move materials around within the cell (Figure 3.40). Because of theirlarger cell size, eukaryotic cells require this system to transport materials that cannot be dispersed by diffusion alone.The endomembrane system comprises several organelles and connections between them, including the endoplasmicreticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and vesicles.24. A.E. Barnhill, M.T. Brewer, S.A. Carlson. “Adverse Effects of Antimicrobials via Predictable or Idiosyncratic Inhibition of HostMitochondrial Components.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 56 no. 8 (2012):4046–4051.Chapter 3 | The Cell 127Figure 3.40 The endomembrane system is composed of a series of membranous intracellular structures thatfacilitate movement of materials throughout the cell and to the cell membrane.Endoplasmic ReticulumThe endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an interconnected array of tubules and cisternae (flattened sacs) with a singlelipid bilayer (Figure 3.41). The spaces inside of the cisternae are called lumen of the ER. There are two types ofER, rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). These two different types ofER are sites for the synthesis of distinctly different types of molecules. RER is studded with ribosomes bound on thecytoplasmic side of the membrane. These ribosomes make proteins destined for the plasma membrane (Figure 3.41).Following synthesis, these proteins are inserted into the membrane of the RER. Small sacs of the RER containingthese newly synthesized proteins then bud off as transport vesicles and move either to the Golgi apparatus for furtherprocessing, directly to the plasma membrane, to the membrane of another organelle, or out of the cell. Transportvesicles are single-lipid, bilayer, membranous spheres with hollow interiors that carry molecules. SER does not haveribosomes and, therefore, appears “smooth.” It is involved in biosynthesis of lipids, carbohydrate metabolism, anddetoxification of toxic compounds within the cell.Figure 3.41 The rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded with ribosomes for the synthesis of membrane proteins(which give it its rough appearance).Golgi ApparatusThe Golgi apparatus was discovered within the endomembrane system in 1898 by Italian scientist Camillo Golgi(1843–1926), who developed a novel staining technique that showed stacked membrane structures within the cellsof Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria. The Golgi apparatus is composed of a series of membranous diskscalled dictyosomes, each having a single lipid bilayer, that are stacked together (Figure 3.42).128 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Enzymes in the Golgi apparatus modify lipids and proteins transported from the ER to the Golgi, often addingcarbohydrate components to them, producing glycolipids, glycoproteins, or proteoglycans. Glycolipids andglycoproteins are often inserted into the plasma membrane and are important for signal recognition by other cells orinfectious particles. Different types of cells can be distinguished from one another by the structure and arrangementof the glycolipids and glycoproteins contained in their plasma membranes. These glycolipids and glycoproteinscommonly also serve as cell surface receptors.Transport vesicles leaving the ER fuse with a Golgi apparatus on its receiving, or cis, face. The proteins are processedwithin the Golgi apparatus, and then additional transport vesicles containing the modified proteins and lipids pinchoff from the Golgi apparatus on its outgoing, or trans, face. These outgoing vesicles move to and fuse with the plasmamembrane or the membrane of other organelles.Exocytosis is the process by which secretory vesicles (spherical membranous sacs) release their contents to the cell’sexterior (Figure 3.42). All cells have constitutive secretory pathways in which secretory vesicles transport solubleproteins that are released from the cell continually (constitutively). Certain specialized cells also have regulatedsecretory pathways, which are used to store soluble proteins in secretory vesicles. Regulated secretion involvessubstances that are only released in response to certain events or signals. For example, certain cells of the humanimmune system (e.g., mast cells) secrete histamine in response to the presence of foreign objects or pathogens in thebody. Histamine is a compound that triggers various mechanisms used by the immune system to eliminate pathogens.Figure 3.42 A transmission electron micrograph (left) of a Golgi apparatus in a white blood cell. The illustration(right) shows the cup-shaped, stacked disks and several transport vesicles. The Golgi apparatus modifies lipids andproteins, producing glycolipids and glycoproteins, respectively, which are commonly inserted into the plasmamembrane.LysosomesIn the 1960s, Belgian scientist Christian de Duve (1917–2013) discovered lysosomes, membrane-bound organelles ofthe endomembrane system that contain digestive enzymes. Certain types of eukaryotic cells use lysosomes to breakdown various particles, such as food, damaged organelles or cellular debris, microorganisms, or immune complexes.Compartmentalization of the digestive enzymes within the lysosome allows the cell to efficiently digest matterwithout harming the cytoplasmic components of the cell.Chapter 3 | The Cell 129• Name the components of the endomembrane system and describe the function of each component.PeroxisomesChristian de Duve is also credited with the discovery of peroxisomes, membrane-bound organelles that are not partof the endomembrane system (Figure 3.43). Peroxisomes form independently in the cytoplasm from the synthesisof peroxin proteins by free ribosomes and the incorporation of these peroxin proteins into existing peroxisomes.Growing peroxisomes then divide by a process similar to binary fission.Peroxisomes were first named for their ability to produce hydrogen peroxide, a highly reactive molecule that helps tobreak down molecules such as uric acid, amino acids, and fatty acids. Peroxisomes also possess the enzyme catalase,which can degrade hydrogen peroxide. Along with the SER, peroxisomes also play a role in lipid biosynthesis.Like lysosomes, the compartmentalization of these degradative molecules within an organelle helps protect thecytoplasmic contents from unwanted damage.The peroxisomes of certain organisms are specialized to meet their particular functional needs. For example,glyoxysomes are modified peroxisomes of yeasts and plant cells that perform several metabolic functions, includingthe production of sugar molecules. Similarly, glycosomes are modified peroxisomes made by certain trypanosomes,the pathogenic protozoans that cause Chagas disease and African sleeping sickness.Figure 3.43 A transmission electron micrograph (left) of a cell containing a peroxisome. The illustration (right) showsthe location of peroxisomes in a cell. These eukaryotic structures play a role in lipid biosynthesis and breaking downvarious molecules. They may also have other specialized functions depending on the cell type. (credit “micrograph”:modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)CytoskeletonEukaryotic cells have an internal cytoskeleton made of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules.This matrix of fibers and tubes provides structural support as well as a network over which materials can betransported within the cell and on which organelles can be anchored (Figure 3.44). For example, the process ofexocytosis involves the movement of a vesicle via the cytoskeletal network to the plasma membrane, where it canrelease its contents.130 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.44 The cytoskeleton is a network of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules foundthroughout the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. In these fluorescently labeled animal cells, the microtubules are green,the actin microfilaments are red, the nucleus is blue, and keratin (a type of intermediate filament) is yellow.Microfilaments are composed of two intertwined strands of actin, each composed of actin monomers formingfilamentous cables 6 nm in diameter[25] (Figure 3.45). The actin filaments work together with motor proteins, likemyosin, to effect muscle contraction in animals or the amoeboid movement of some eukaryotic microbes. In ameboidorganisms, actin can be found in two forms: a stiffer, polymerized, gel form and a more fluid, unpolymerized solubleform. Actin in the gel form creates stability in the ectoplasm, the gel-like area of cytoplasm just inside the plasmamembrane of ameboid protozoans.Temporary extensions of the cytoplasmic membrane called pseudopodia (meaning “false feet”) are produced throughthe forward flow of soluble actin filaments into the pseudopodia, followed by the gel-sol cycling of the actinfilaments, resulting in cell motility. Once the cytoplasm extends outward, forming a pseudopodium, the remainingcytoplasm flows up to join the leading edge, thereby creating forward locomotion. Beyond amoeboid movement,microfilaments are also involved in a variety of other processes in eukaryotic cells, including cytoplasmic streaming(the movement or circulation of cytoplasm within the cell), cleavage furrow formation during cell division, andmuscle movement in animals (Figure 3.45). These functions are the result of the dynamic nature of microfilaments,which can polymerize and depolymerize relatively easily in response to cellular signals, and their interactions withmolecular motors in different types of eukaryotic cells.25. Fuchs E, Cleveland DW. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350(1998):514–519.Chapter 3 | The Cell 131Figure 3.45 (a) A microfilament is composed of a pair of actin filaments. (b) Each actin filament is a string ofpolymerized actin monomers. (c) The dynamic nature of actin, due to its polymerization and depolymerization and itsassociation with myosin, allows microfilaments to be involved in a variety of cellular processes, including ameboidmovement, cytoplasmic streaming, contractile ring formation during cell division, and muscle contraction in animals.Intermediate filaments (Figure 3.46) are a diverse group of cytoskeletal filaments that act as cables within thecell. They are termed “intermediate” because their 10-nm diameter is thicker than that of actin but thinner than thatof microtubules.[26] They are composed of several strands of polymerized subunits that, in turn, are made up of awide variety of monomers. Intermediate filaments tend to be more permanent in the cell and maintain the positionof the nucleus. They also form the nuclear lamina (lining or layer) just inside the nuclear envelope. Additionally,intermediate filaments play a role in anchoring cells together in animal tissues. The intermediate filament proteindesmin is found in desmosomes, the protein structures that join muscle cells together and help them resist externalphysical forces. The intermediate filament protein keratin is a structural protein found in hair, skin, and nails.26. E. Fuchs, D.W. Cleveland. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350(1998):514–519.132 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.46 (a) Intermediate filaments are composed of multiple strands of polymerized subunits. They are morepermanent than other cytoskeletal structures and serve a variety of functions. (b) Intermediate filaments form much ofthe nuclear lamina. (c) Intermediate filaments form the desmosomes between cells in some animal tissues. (credit c“illustration”: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)Microtubules (Figure 3.47) are a third type of cytoskeletal fiber composed of tubulin dimers (α tubulin and βtubulin). These form hollow tubes 23 nm in diameter that are used as girders within the cytoskeleton.[27] Likemicrofilaments, microtubules are dynamic and have the ability to rapidly assemble and disassemble. Microtubulesalso work with motor proteins (such as dynein and kinesin) to move organelles and vesicles around within thecytoplasm. Additionally, microtubules are the main components of eukaryotic flagella and cilia, composing both thefilament and the basal body components (Figure 3.54).Figure 3.47 (a) Microtubules are hollow structures composed of polymerized tubulin dimers. (b) They are involved inseveral cellular processes, including the movement of organelles throughout the cytoplasm. Motor proteins carryorganelles along microtubule tracks that crisscross the entire cell. (credit b: modification of work by National Instituteon Aging)In addition, microtubules are involved in cell division, forming the mitotic spindle that serves to separatechromosomes during mitosis and meiosis. The mitotic spindle is produced by two centrosomes, which are essentiallymicrotubule-organizing centers, at opposite ends of the cell. Each centrosome is composed of a pair of centriolespositioned at right angles to each other, and each centriole is an array of nine parallel microtubules arranged in triplets27. E. Fuchs, D.W. Cleveland. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350(1998):514–519.Chapter 3 | The Cell 133(Figure 3.48).Figure 3.48 (a) A centrosome is composed of two centrioles positioned at right angles to each other. Each centrioleis composed of nine triplets of microtubules held together by accessory proteins. (b) In animal cells, the centrosomes(arrows) serve as microtubule-organizing centers of the mitotic spindle during mitosis.• Compare and contrast the three types of cytoskeletal structures described in this section.MitochondriaThe large, complex organelles in which aerobic cellular respiration occurs in eukaryotic cells are called mitochondria(Figure 3.49). The term “mitochondrion” was first coined by German microbiologist Carl Benda in 1898 and waslater connected with the process of respiration by Otto Warburg in 1913. Scientists during the 1960s discovered thatmitochondria have their own genome and 70S ribosomes. The mitochondrial genome was found to be bacterial, whenit was sequenced in 1976. These findings ultimately supported the endosymbiotic theory proposed by Lynn Margulis,which states that mitochondria originally arose through an endosymbiotic event in which a bacterium capable ofaerobic cellular respiration was taken up by phagocytosis into a host cell and remained as a viable intracellularcomponent.Each mitochondrion has two lipid membranes. The outer membrane is a remnant of the original host cell’s membranestructures. The inner membrane was derived from the bacterial plasma membrane. The electron transport chainfor aerobic respiration uses integral proteins embedded in the inner membrane. The mitochondrial matrix,corresponding to the location of the original bacterium’s cytoplasm, is the current location of many metabolicenzymes. It also contains mitochondrial DNA and 70S ribosomes. Invaginations of the inner membrane, calledcristae, evolved to increase surface area for the location of biochemical reactions. The folding patterns of the cristaediffer among various types of eukaryotic cells and are used to distinguish different eukaryotic organisms from eachother.134 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.49 Each mitochondrion is surrounded by two membranes, the inner of which is extensively folded intocristae and is the site of the intermembrane space. The mitochondrial matrix contains the mitochondrial DNA,ribosomes, and metabolic enzymes. The transmission electron micrograph of a mitochondrion, on the right, showsboth membranes, including cristae and the mitochondrial matrix. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work byMatthew Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)ChloroplastsPlant cells and algal cells contain chloroplasts, the organelles in which photosynthesis occurs (Figure 3.50). Allchloroplasts have at least three membrane systems: the outer membrane, the inner membrane, and the thylakoidmembrane system. Inside the outer and inner membranes is the chloroplast stroma, a gel-like fluid that makes upmuch of a chloroplast’s volume, and in which the thylakoid system floats. The thylakoid system is a highly dynamiccollection of folded membrane sacs. It is where the green photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll is found and the lightreactions of photosynthesis occur. In most plant chloroplasts, the thylakoids are arranged in stacks called grana(singular: granum), whereas in some algal chloroplasts, the thylakoids are free floating.Figure 3.50 Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts, which have an outer membrane and an inner membrane.Stacks of thylakoids called grana form a third membrane layer.Other organelles similar to mitochondria have arisen in other types of eukaryotes, but their roles differ.Hydrogenosomes are found in some anaerobic eukaryotes and serve as the location of anaerobic hydrogen production.Hydrogenosomes typically lack their own DNA and ribosomes. Kinetoplasts are a variation of the mitochondria foundin some eukaryotic pathogens. In these organisms, each cell has a single, long, branched mitochondrion in whichkinetoplast DNA, organized as multiple circular pieces of DNA, is found concentrated at one pole of the cell.Chapter 3 | The Cell 135Mitochondria-Related Organelles in Protozoan ParasitesMany protozoans, including several protozoan parasites that cause infections in humans, can be identifiedby their unusual appearance. Distinguishing features may include complex cell morphologies, the presenceof unique organelles, or the absence of common organelles. The protozoan parasites Giardia lamblia andTrichomonas vaginalis are two examples.G. lamblia, a frequent cause of diarrhea in humans and many other animals, is an anaerobic parasitethat possesses two nuclei and several flagella. Its Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum are greatlyreduced, and it lacks mitochondria completely. However, it does have organelles known as mitosomes, doublemembrane-bound organelles that appear to be severely reduced mitochondria. This has led scientists tobelieve that G. lamblia’s ancestors once possessed mitochondria that evolved to become mitosomes. T.vaginalis, which causes the sexually transmitted infection vaginitis, is another protozoan parasite that lacksconventional mitochondria. Instead, it possesses hydrogenosomes, mitochondrial-related, double-membraneboundorganelles that produce molecular hydrogen used in cellular metabolism. Scientists believe thathydrogenosomes, like mitosomes, also evolved from mitochondria.[28]Plasma MembraneThe plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is similar in structure to the prokaryotic plasma membrane in that it iscomposed mainly of phospholipids forming a bilayer with embedded peripheral and integral proteins (Figure 3.51).These membrane components move within the plane of the membrane according to the fluid mosaic model. However,unlike the prokaryotic membrane, eukaryotic membranes contain sterols, including cholesterol, that alter membranefluidity. Additionally, many eukaryotic cells contain some specialized lipids, including sphingolipids, which arethought to play a role in maintaining membrane stability as well as being involved in signal transduction pathwaysand cell-to-cell communication.Micro Connections28. N. Yarlett, J.H.P. Hackstein. “Hydrogenosomes: One Organelle, Multiple Origins.” BioScience 55 no. 8 (2005):657–658.136 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 3.51 The eukaryotic plasma membrane is composed of a lipid bilayer with many embedded or associatedproteins. It contains cholesterol for the maintenance of membrane, as well as glycoproteins and glycolipids that areimportant in the recognition other cells or pathogens.Membrane Transport MechanismsThe processes of simple diffusion, facilitated diffusion, and active transport are used in both eukaryotic andprokaryotic cells. However, eukaryotic cells also have the unique ability to perform various types of endocytosis,the uptake of matter through plasma membrane invagination and vacuole/vesicle formation (Figure 3.52). A typeof endocytosis involving the engulfment of large particles through membrane invagination is called phagocytosis,which means “cell eating.” In phagocytosis, particles (or other cells) are enclosed in a pocket within the membrane,which then pinches off from the membrane to form a vacuole that completely surrounds the particle. Another type ofendocytosis is called pinocytosis, which means “cell drinking.” In pinocytosis, small, dissolved materials and liquidsare taken into the cell through small vesicles. Saprophytic fungi, for example, obtain their nutrients from dead anddecaying matter largely through pinocytosis.Receptor-mediated endocytosis is a type of endocytosis that is initiated by specific molecules called ligands whenthey bind to cell surface receptors on the membrane. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the mechanism that peptideand amine-derived hormones use to enter cells and is also used by various viruses and bacteria for entry into hostcells.Chapter 3 | The Cell 137Figure 3.52 Three variations of endocytosis are shown. (a) In phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds theparticle and pinches off to form an intracellular vacuole. (b) In pinocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds a smallvolume of fluid and pinches off, forming a vesicle. (c) In receptor-mediated endocytosis, the uptake of substances istargeted to a specific substance (a ligand) that binds at the receptor on the external cell membrane. (credit:modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)The process by which secretory vesicles release their contents to the cell’s exterior is called exocytosis. Vesicles movetoward the plasma membrane and then meld with the membrane, ejecting their contents out of the cell. Exocytosis isused by cells to remove waste products and may also be used to release chemical signals that can be taken up by othercells.Cell WallIn addition to a plasma membrane, some eukaryotic cells have a cell wall. Cells of fungi, algae, plants, and evensome protists have cell walls. Depending upon the type of eukaryotic cell, cell walls can be made of a wide range ofmaterials, including cellulose (fungi and plants); biogenic silica, calcium carbonate, agar, and carrageenan (protistsand algae); or chitin (fungi). In general, all cell walls provide structural stability for the cell and protection fromenvironmental stresses such as desiccation, changes in osmotic pressure, and traumatic injury.[29]Extracellular MatrixCells of animals and some protozoans do not have cell walls to help maintain shape and provide structural stability.Instead, these types of eukaryotic cells produce an extracellular matrix for this purpose. They secrete a stickymass of carbohydrates and proteins into the spaces between adjacent cells (Figure 3.53). Some protein componentsassemble into a basement membrane to which the remaining extracellular matrix components adhere. Proteoglycanstypically form the bulky mass of the extracellular matrix while fibrous proteins, like collagen, provide strength. Bothproteoglycans and collagen are attached to fibronectin proteins, which, in turn, are attached to integrin proteins. Theseintegrin proteins interact with transmembrane proteins in the plasma membranes of eukaryotic cells that lack cellwalls.In animal cells, the extracellular matrix allows cells within tissues to withstand external stresses and transmits signalsfrom the outside of the cell to the inside. The amount of extracellular matrix is quite extensive in various types of29. M. Dudzick. “Protists.” OpenStax CNX. November 27, 2013. http://cnx.org/contents/f7048bb6-e462-459b-805c-ef291cf7049c@1138 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5connective tissues, and variations in the extracellular matrix can give different types of tissues their distinct properties.In addition, a host cell’s extracellular matrix is often the site where microbial pathogens attach themselves to establishinfection. For example, Streptococcus pyogenes, the bacterium that causes strep throat and various other infections,binds to fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of the cells lining the oropharynx (upper region of the throat).Figure 3.53 The extracellular matrix is composed of protein and carbohydrate components. It protects cells fromphysical stresses and transmits signals arriving at the outside edges of the tissue to cells deeper within the tissue.Flagella and CiliaSome eukaryotic cells use flagella for locomotion; however, eukaryotic flagella are structurally distinct from thosefound in prokaryotic cells. Whereas the prokaryotic flagellum is a stiff, rotating structure, a eukaryotic flagellum ismore like a flexible whip composed of nine parallel pairs of microtubules surrounding a central pair of microtubules.This arrangement is referred to as a 9+2 array (Figure 3.54). The parallel microtubules use dynein motor proteinsto move relative to each other, causing the flagellum to bend.Cilia (singular: cilium) are a similar external structure found in some eukaryotic cells. Unique to eukaryotes, cilia areshorter than flagella and often cover the entire surface of a cell; however, they are structurally similar to flagella (a9+2 array of microtubules) and use the same mechanism for movement. A structure called a basal body is found atthe base of each cilium and flagellum. The basal body, which attaches the cilium or flagellum to the cell, is composedof an array of triplet microtubules similar to that of a centriole but embedded in the plasma membrane. Because oftheir shorter length, cilia use a rapid, flexible, waving motion. In addition to motility, cilia may have other functionssuch as sweeping particles past or into cells. For example, ciliated protozoans use the sweeping of cilia to move foodparticles into their mouthparts, and ciliated cells in the mammalian respiratory tract beat in synchrony to sweep mucusChapter 3 | The Cell 139and debris up and out of the lungs (Figure 3.54).Figure 3.54 (a) Eukaryotic flagella and cilia are composed of a 9+2 array of microtubules, as seen in thistransmission electron micrograph cross-section. (b) The sliding of these microtubules relative to each other causes aflagellum to bend. (c) An illustration of Trichomonas vaginalis, a flagellated protozoan parasite that causes vaginitis.(d) Many protozoans, like this Paramecium, have numerous cilia that aid in locomotion as well as in feeding. Note themouth opening shown here. (credit d: modification of work by University of Vermont/National Institutes of Health)• Explain how the cellular envelope of eukaryotic cells compares to that of prokaryotic cells.• Explain the difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic flagella.140 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ResolutionSince amoxicillin has not resolved Barbara’s case of pneumonia, the PA prescribes another antibiotic,azithromycin, which targets bacterial ribosomes rather than peptidoglycan. After taking the azithromycin asdirected, Barbara’s symptoms resolve and she finally begins to feel like herself again. Presuming no drugresistance to amoxicillin was involved, and given the effectiveness of azithromycin, the causative agent ofBarbara’s pneumonia is most likely Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Even though this bacterium is a prokaryoticcell, it is not inhibited by amoxicillin because it does not have a cell wall and, therefore, does not makepeptidoglycan.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary3.1 Spontaneous Generation• The theory of spontaneous generation states that life arose from nonliving matter. It was a long-held beliefdating back to Aristotle and the ancient Greeks.• Experimentation by Francesco Redi in the 17th century presented the first significant evidence refutingspontaneous generation by showing that flies must have access to meat for maggots to develop on themeat. Prominent scientists designed experiments and argued both in support of (John Needham) and against(Lazzaro Spallanzani) spontaneous generation.• Louis Pasteur is credited with conclusively disproving the theory of spontaneous generation with his famousswan-neck flask experiment. He subsequently proposed that “life only comes from life.”3.2 Foundations of Modern Cell Theory• Although cells were first observed in the 1660s by Robert Hooke, cell theory was not well accepted foranother 200 years. The work of scientists such as Schleiden, Schwann, Remak, and Virchow contributed to itsacceptance.• Endosymbiotic theory states that mitochondria and chloroplasts, organelles found in many types oforganisms, have their origins in bacteria. Significant structural and genetic information support this theory.• The miasma theory of disease was widely accepted until the 19th century, when it was replaced by the germtheory of disease thanks to the work of Semmelweis, Snow, Pasteur, Lister, and Koch, and others.3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells• Prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells in that their genetic material is contained in a nucleoid ratherthan a membrane-bound nucleus. In addition, prokaryotic cells generally lack membrane-bound organelles.• Prokaryotic cells of the same species typically share a similar cell morphology and cellular arrangement.• Most prokaryotic cells have a cell wall that helps the organism maintain cellular morphology and protects itagainst changes in osmotic pressure.• Outside of the nucleoid, prokaryotic cells may contain extrachromosomal DNA in plasmids.• Prokaryotic ribosomes that are found in the cytoplasm have a size of 70S.• Some prokaryotic cells have inclusions that store nutrients or chemicals for other uses.• Some prokaryotic cells are able to form endospores through sporulation to survive in a dormant statewhen conditions are unfavorable. Endospores can germinate, transforming back into vegetative cells whenconditions improve.• In prokaryotic cells, the cell envelope includes a plasma membrane and usually a cell wall.• Bacterial membranes are composed of phospholipids with integral or peripheral proteins. The fatty acidClinical FocusChapter 3 | The Cell 141components of these phospholipids are ester-linked and are often used to identify specific types of bacteria.The proteins serve a variety of functions, including transport, cell-to-cell communication, and sensingenvironmental conditions. Archaeal membranes are distinct in that they are composed of fatty acids that areether-linked to phospholipids.• Some molecules can move across the bacterial membrane by simple diffusion, but most large molecules mustbe actively transported through membrane structures using cellular energy.• Prokaryotic cell walls may be composed of peptidoglycan (bacteria) or pseudopeptidoglycan (archaea).• Gram-positive bacterial cells are characterized by a thick peptidoglycan layer, whereas gram-negativebacterial cells are characterized by a thin peptidoglycan layer surrounded by an outer membrane.• Some prokaryotic cells produce glycocalyx coatings, such as capsules and slime layers, that aid in attachmentto surfaces and/or evasion of the host immune system.• Some prokaryotic cells have fimbriae or pili, filamentous appendages that aid in attachment to surfaces. Piliare also used in the transfer of genetic material between cells.• Some prokaryotic cells use one or more flagella to move through water. Peritrichous bacteria, which havenumerous flagella, use runs and tumbles to move purposefully in the direction of a chemical attractant.3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic Cells• Eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a nucleus containing the DNA genome and bound by a nuclearmembrane (or nuclear envelope) composed of two lipid bilayers that regulate transport of materials into andout of the nucleus through nuclear pores.• Eukaryotic cell morphologies vary greatly and may be maintained by various structures, including thecytoskeleton, the cell membrane, and/or the cell wall• The nucleolus, located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, is the site of ribosomal synthesis and the first stagesof ribosome assembly.• Eukaryotic cells contain 80S ribosomes in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (membrane bound-ribosomes)and cytoplasm (free ribosomes). They contain 70s ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts.• Eukaryotic cells have evolved an endomembrane system, containing membrane-bound organelles involvedin transport. These include vesicles, the endoplasmic reticulum, and the Golgi apparatus.• The smooth endoplasmic reticulum plays a role in lipid biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, anddetoxification of toxic compounds. The rough endoplasmic reticulum contains membrane-bound 80Sribosomes that synthesize proteins destined for the cell membrane• The Golgi apparatus processes proteins and lipids, typically through the addition of sugar molecules,producing glycoproteins or glycolipids, components of the plasma membrane that are used in cell-to-cellcommunication.• Lysosomes contain digestive enzymes that break down small particles ingested by endocytosis, large particlesor cells ingested by phagocytosis, and damaged intracellular components.• The cytoskeleton, composed of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules, providesstructural support in eukaryotic cells and serves as a network for transport of intracellular materials.• Centrosomes are microtubule-organizing centers important in the formation of the mitotic spindle in mitosis.• Mitochondria are the site of cellular respiration. They have two membranes: an outer membrane and an innermembrane with cristae. The mitochondrial matrix, within the inner membrane, contains the mitochondrialDNA, 70S ribosomes, and metabolic enzymes.• The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is structurally similar to that found in prokaryotic cells, andmembrane components move according to the fluid mosaic model. However, eukaryotic membranes containsterols, which alter membrane fluidity, as well as glycoproteins and glycolipids, which help the cell recognizeother cells and infectious particles.• In addition to active transport and passive transport, eukaryotic cell membranes can take material into the cellvia endocytosis, or expel matter from the cell via exocytosis.142 Chapter 3 | The CellThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Cells of fungi, algae, plants, and some protists have a cell wall, whereas cells of animals and some protozoanshave a sticky extracellular matrix that provides structural support and mediates cellular signaling.• Eukaryotic flagella are structurally distinct from prokaryotic flagella but serve a similar purpose (locomotion).Cilia are structurally similar to eukaryotic flagella, but shorter; they may be used for locomotion, feeding, or movement of extracellular particles.