Chapter 19Diseases of the Immune SystemFigure 19.1 Bee stings and other allergens can cause life-threatening, systemic allergic reactions. Sensitiveindividuals may need to carry an epinephrine auto-injector (e.g., EpiPen) in case of a sting. A bee-sting allergy is anexample of an immune response that is harmful to the host rather than protective; epinephrine counteracts the severedrop in blood pressure that can result from the immune response. (credit right: modification of work by CarolBleistine)Chapter Outline19.1 Hypersensitivities19.2 Autoimmune Disorders19.3 Organ Transplantation and Rejection19.4 Immunodeficiency19.5 Cancer Immunobiology and ImmunotherapyIntroductionAn allergic reaction is an immune response to a type of antigen called an allergen. Allergens can be found in manydifferent items, from peanuts and insect stings to latex and some drugs. Unlike other kinds of antigens, allergens arenot necessarily associated with pathogenic microbes, and many allergens provoke no immune response at all in mostpeople.Allergic responses vary in severity. Some are mild and localized, like hay fever or hives, but others can result insystemic, life-threatening reactions. Anaphylaxis, for example, is a rapidly developing allergic reaction that can causea dangerous drop in blood pressure and severe swelling of the throat that may close off the airway.Allergies are just one example of how the immune system—the system normally responsible for preventingdisease—can actually cause or mediate disease symptoms. In this chapter, we will further explore allergies and otherdisorders of the immune system, including hypersensitivity reactions, autoimmune diseases, transplant rejection, anddiseases associated with immunodeficiency.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 81919.1 HypersensitivitiesLearning Objectives• Identify and compare the distinguishing characteristics, mechanisms, and major examples of type I, II, III, andIV hypersensitivitiesIn Adaptive Specific Host Defenses, we discussed the mechanisms by which adaptive immune defenses, bothhumoral and cellular, protect us from infectious diseases. However, these same protective immune defenses can alsobe responsible for undesirable reactions called hypersensitivity reactions. Hypersensitivity reactions are classified bytheir immune mechanism.• Type I hypersensitivity reactions involve immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody against soluble antigen, triggeringmast cell degranulation.• Type II hypersensitivity reactions involve IgG and IgM antibodies directed against cellular antigens, leadingto cell damage mediated by other immune system effectors.• Type III hypersensitivity reactions involve the interactions of IgG, IgM, and, occasionally, IgA[1] antibodieswith antigen to form immune complexes. Accumulation of immune complexes in tissue leads to tissue damagemediated by other immune system effectors.• Type IV hypersensitivity reactions are T-cell–mediated reactions that can involve tissue damage mediated byactivated macrophages and cytotoxic T cells.Type I HypersensitivitiesWhen a presensitized individual is exposed to an allergen, it can lead to a rapid immune response that occursalmost immediately. Such a response is called an allergy and is classified as a type I hypersensitivity. Allergensmay be seemingly harmless substances such as animal dander, molds, or pollen. Allergens may also be substancesconsidered innately more hazardous, such as insect venom or therapeutic drugs. Food intolerances can also yieldallergic reactions as individuals become sensitized to foods such as peanuts or shellfish (Figure 19.2). Regardlessof the allergen, the first exposure activates a primary IgE antibody response that sensitizes an individual to type Ihypersensitivity reaction upon subsequent exposure.Part 1Kerry, a 40-year-old airline pilot, has made an appointment with her primary care physician to discuss a rashthat develops whenever she spends time in the sun. As she explains to her physician, it does not seemlike sunburn. She is careful not to spend too much time in the sun and she uses sunscreen. Despite theseprecautions, the rash still appears, manifesting as red, raised patches that get slightly scaly. The rash persistsfor 7 to 10 days each time, and it seems to largely go away on its own. Lately, the rashes have also begun toappear on her cheeks and above her eyes on either side of her forehead.• Is Kerry right to be concerned, or should she simply be more careful about sun exposure?• Are there conditions that might be brought on by sun exposure that Kerry’s physician should beconsidering?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus1. D.S. Strayer et al (eds). Rubin’s Pathology: Clinicopathologic Foundations of Medicine. 7th ed. 2Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams& Wilkins, 2014.820 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.2 (a) Allergens in plant pollen, shown here in a colorized electron micrograph, may trigger allergic rhinitisor hay fever in sensitive individuals. (b) Skin rashes are often associated with allergic reactions. (c) Peanuts can beeaten safely by most people but can provoke severe allergic reactions in sensitive individuals.For susceptible individuals, a first exposure to an allergen activates a strong TH2 cell response (Figure 19.3).Cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 from the TH2 cells activate B cells specific to the same allergen, resulting inclonal proliferation, differentiation into plasma cells, and antibody-class switch from production of IgM to productionof IgE. The fragment crystallizable (Fc) regions of the IgE antibodies bind to specific receptors on the surface ofmast cells throughout the body. It is estimated that each mast cell can bind up to 500,000 IgE molecules, with eachIgE molecule having two allergen-specific fragment antigen-binding (Fab) sites available for binding allergen onsubsequent exposures. By the time this occurs, the allergen is often no longer present and there is no allergic reaction,but the mast cells are primed for a subsequent exposure and the individual is sensitized to the allergen.On subsequent exposure, allergens bind to multiple IgE molecules on mast cells, cross-linking the IgE molecules.Within minutes, this cross-linking of IgE activates the mast cells and triggers degranulation, a reaction in which thecontents of the granules in the mast cell are released into the extracellular environment. Preformed components thatare released from granules include histamine, serotonin, and bradykinin (Table 19.1). The activated mast cells alsorelease newly formed lipid mediators (leukotrienes and prostaglandins from membrane arachadonic acid metabolism)and cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (Table 19.2).The chemical mediators released by mast cells collectively cause the inflammation and signs and symptomsassociated with type I hypersensitivity reactions. Histamine stimulates mucus secretion in nasal passages and tearformation from lacrimal glands, promoting the runny nose and watery eyes of allergies. Interaction of histaminewith nerve endings causes itching and sneezing. The vasodilation caused by several of the mediators can result inhives, headaches, angioedema (swelling that often affects the lips, throat, and tongue), and hypotension (low bloodpressure). Bronchiole constriction caused by some of the chemical mediators leads to wheezing, dyspnea (difficultybreathing), coughing, and, in more severe cases, cyanosis (bluish color to the skin or mucous membranes). Vomitingcan result from stimulation of the vomiting center in the cerebellum by histamine and serotonin. Histamine can alsocause relaxation of intestinal smooth muscles and diarrhea.Selected Preformed Components of Mast Cell GranulesGranuleComponentActivityHeparin Stimulates the generation of bradykinin, which causes increased vascular permeability,vasodilation, bronchiole constriction, and increased mucus secretionHistamine Causes smooth-muscle contraction, increases vascular permeability, increases mucus and tearformationSerotonin Increases vascular permeability, causes vasodilation and smooth-muscle contractionTable 19.1Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 821Selected Newly Formed Chemical Mediators of Inflammation and Allergic ResponseChemicalMediatorActivityLeukotriene Causes smooth-muscle contraction and mucus secretion, increases vascularpermeabilityProstaglandin Causes smooth-muscle contraction and vasodilationTNF-α (cytokine) Causes inflammation and stimulates cytokine production by other cell typesTable 19.2Figure 19.3 On first exposure to an allergen in a susceptible individual, antigen-presenting cells process andpresent allergen epitopes with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II to T helper cells. B cells also process andpresent the same allergen epitope to TH2 cells, which release cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 to stimulate proliferation anddifferentiation into IgE-secreting plasma cells. The IgE molecules bind to mast cells with their Fc region, sensitizingthe mast cells for activation with subsequent exposure to the allergen. With each subsequent exposure, the allergencross-links IgE molecules on the mast cells, activating the mast cells and causing the release of preformed chemicalmediators from granules (degranulation), as well as newly formed chemical mediators that collectively cause thesigns and symptoms of type I hypersensitivity reactions.Type I hypersensitivity reactions can be either localized or systemic. Localized type I hypersensitivity reactionsinclude hay fever rhinitis, hives, and asthma (Table 19.3). Systemic type I hypersensitivity reactions are referred toas anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock. Although anaphylaxis shares many symptoms common with the localizedtype I hypersensitivity reactions, the swelling of the tongue and trachea, blockage of airways, dangerous drop in bloodpressure, and development of shock can make anaphylaxis especially severe and life-threatening. In fact, death can822 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5occur within minutes of onset of signs and symptoms.Late-phase reactions in type I hypersensitivities may develop 4–12 hours after the early phase and are mediated byeosinophils, neutrophils, and lymphocytes that have been recruited by chemotactic factors released from mast cells.Activation of these recruited cells leads to the release of more chemical mediators that cause tissue damage and latephasesymptoms of swelling and redness of the skin, coughing, wheezing, and nasal discharge.Individuals who possess genes for maladaptive traits, such as intense type I hypersensitivity reactions to otherwiseharmless components of the environment, would be expected to suffer reduced reproductive success. With this kindof evolutionary selective pressure, such traits would not be expected to persist in a population. This suggests thattype I hypersensitivities may have an adaptive function. There is evidence that the IgE produced during type Ihypersensitivity reactions is actually meant to counter helminth infections[2]. Helminths are one of few organismsthat possess proteins that are targeted by IgE. In addition, there is evidence that helminth infections at a young agereduce the likelihood of type I hypersensitivities to innocuous substances later in life. Thus it may be that allergiesare an unfortunate consequence of strong selection in the mammalian lineage or earlier for a defense against parasiticworms.Type I HypersensitivitiesCommonNameCause Signs and SymptomsAllergy-inducedasthmaInhalation of allergens Constriction of bronchi, labored breathing, coughing, chills,body achesAnaphylaxis Systemic reaction toallergensHives, itching, swelling of tongue and throat, nausea, vomiting,low blood pressure, shockHay fever Inhalation of mold orpollenRunny nose, watery eyes, sneezingHives (urticaria) Food or drug allergens,insect stingsRaised, bumpy skin rash with itching; bumps may converge intolarge raised areasTable 19.3• What are the cells that cause a type I hypersensitivity reaction?• Describe the differences between immediate and late-phase type I hypersensitivity reactions.• List the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis.The Hygiene HypothesisIn most modern societies, good hygiene is associated with regular bathing, and good health with cleanliness.But some recent studies suggest that the association between health and clean living may be a faulty one.Some go so far as to suggest that children should be encouraged to play in the dirt—or even eat dirt[3]—forMicro Connections2. C.M. Fitzsimmons et al. “Helminth Allergens, Parasite-Specific IgE, and Its Protective Role in Human Immunity.” Frontier inImmunology 5 (2015):47.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 823the benefit of their health. This recommendation is based on the so-called hygiene hypothesis, which proposesthat childhood exposure to antigens from a diverse range of microbes leads to a better-functioning immunesystem later in life.The hygiene hypothesis was first suggested in 1989 by David Strachan[4], who observed an inverserelationship between the number of older children in a family and the incidence of hay fever. Although hay feverin children had increased dramatically during the mid-20th century, incidence was significantly lower in familieswith more children. Strachan proposed that the lower incidence of allergies in large families could be linkedto infections acquired from older siblings, suggesting that these infections made children less susceptible toallergies. Strachan also argued that trends toward smaller families and a greater emphasis on cleanlinessin the 20th century had decreased exposure to pathogens and thus led to higher overall rates of allergies,asthma, and other immune disorders.Other researchers have observed an inverse relationship between the incidence of immune disorders andinfectious diseases that are now rare in industrialized countries but still common in less industrializedcountries.[5] In developed nations, children under the age of 5 years are not exposed to many of the microbes,molecules, and antigens they almost certainly would have encountered a century ago. The lack of earlychallenges to the immune system by organisms with which humans and their ancestors evolved may result infailures in immune system functioning later in life.Type II (Cytotoxic) HypersensitivitiesImmune reactions categorized as type II hypersensitivities, or cytotoxic hypersensitivities, are mediated by IgGand IgM antibodies binding to cell-surface antigens or matrix-associated antigens on basement membranes. Theseantibodies can either activate complement, resulting in an inflammatory response and lysis of the targeted cells, orthey can be involved in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) with cytotoxic T cells.In some cases, the antigen may be a self-antigen, in which case the reaction would also be described as an autoimmunedisease. (Autoimmune diseases are described in Autoimmune Disorders). In other cases, antibodies may bind tonaturally occurring, but exogenous, cell-surface molecules such as antigens associated with blood typing found onred blood cells (RBCs). This leads to the coating of the RBCs by antibodies, activation of the complement cascade,and complement-mediated lysis of RBCs, as well as opsonization of RBCs for phagocytosis. Two examples of typeII hypersensitivity reactions involving RBCs are hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) and hemolytic disease of thenewborn (HDN). These type II hypersensitivity reactions, which will be discussed in greater detail, are summarizedin Table 19.4.Immunohematology is the study of blood and blood-forming tissue in relation to the immune response. Antibodyinitiatedresponses against blood cells are type II hypersensitivities, thus falling into the field of immunohematology.For students first learning about immunohematology, understanding the immunological mechanisms involved is madeeven more challenging by the complex nomenclature system used to identify different blood-group antigens, oftencalled blood types. The first blood-group antigens either used alphabetical names or were named for the first personknown to produce antibodies to the red blood cell antigen (e.g., Kell, Duffy, or Diego). However, in 1980, theInternational Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT) Working Party on Terminology created a standard for blood-groupterminology in an attempt to more consistently identify newly discovered blood group antigens. New antigens arenow given a number and assigned to a blood-group system, collection, or series. However, even with this effort,blood-group nomenclature is still inconsistent.3. S.T. Weiss. “Eat Dirt—The Hygiene Hypothesis and Allergic Diseases.” New England Journal of Medicine 347 no. 12 (2002):930–931.4. D.P. Strachan “Hay Fever, Hygiene, and Household Size.” British Medical Journal 299 no. 6710 (1989):1259.5. H. Okada et al. “The ‘Hygiene Hypothesis’ for Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases: An Update.” Clinical & Experimental Immunology160 no. 1 (2010):1–9.824 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Common Type II HypersensitivitiesCommon Name Cause Signs and SymptomsHemolyticdisease of thenewborn (HDN)IgG from mother crosses theplacenta, targeting the fetus’ RBCsfor destructionAnemia, edema, enlarged liver or spleen, hydrops(fluid in body cavity), leading to death of newbornin severe casesHemolytictransfusionreactions (HTR)IgG and IgM bind to antigens ontransfused RBCs, targeting donorRBCs for destructionFever, jaundice, hypotension, disseminatedintravascular coagulation, possibly leading tokidney failure and deathTable 19.4ABO Blood Group IncompatibilityThe recognition that individuals have different blood types was first described by Karl Landsteiner (1868–1943) inthe early 1900s, based on his observation that serum from one person could cause a clumping of RBCs from another.These studies led Landsteiner to the identification of four distinct blood types. Subsequent research by other scientistsdetermined that the four blood types were based on the presence or absence of surface carbohydrates “A” and “B,”and this provided the foundation for the ABO blood group system that is still in use today (Figure 19.4). Thefunctions of these antigens are unknown, but some have been associated with normal biochemical functions of thecell. Furthermore, ABO blood types are inherited as alleles (one from each parent), and they display patterns ofdominant and codominant inheritance. The alleles for A and B blood types are codominant to each other, and bothare dominant over blood type O. Therefore, individuals with genotypes of AA or AO have type A blood and expressthe A carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs. People with genotypes of BB or BO have type B blood andexpress the B carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs. Those with a genotype of AB have type AB bloodand express both A and B carbohydrate antigens on the surface of their RBCs. Finally, individuals with a genotype ofOO have type O blood and lack A and B carbohydrate on the surface of their RBCs.It is important to note that the RBCs of all four ABO blood types share a common protein receptor molecule, andit is the addition of specific carbohydrates to the protein receptors that determines A, B, and AB blood types. Thegenes that are inherited for the A, B, and AB blood types encode enzymes that add the carbohydrate component tothe protein receptor. Individuals with O blood type still have the protein receptor but lack the enzymes that would addcarbohydrates that would make their red blood cell type A, B, or AB.IgM antibodies in plasma that cross-react with blood group antigens not present on an individual’s own RBCs arecalled isohemagglutinins (Figure 19.4). Isohemagglutinins are produced within the first few weeks after birth andpersist throughout life. These antibodies are produced in response to exposure to environmental antigens from foodand microorganisms. A person with type A blood has A antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-Bantibodies to environmental antigens that resemble the carbohydrate component of B antigens. A person with type Bblood has B antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-A antibodies to environmental antigens thatare similar to the carbohydrate component of A antigens. People with blood type O lack both A and B antigens ontheir RBCs and, therefore, produce both anti-A and anti-B antibodies. Conversely, people with AB blood type haveboth A and B antigens on their RBCs and, therefore, lack anti-A and anti-B antibodies.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 825Figure 19.4A patient may require a blood transfusion because they lack sufficient RBCs (anemia) or because they haveexperienced significant loss of blood volume through trauma or disease. Although the blood transfusion is given tohelp the patient, it is essential that the patient receive a transfusion with matching ABO blood type. A transfusion withan incompatible ABO blood type may lead to a strong, potentially lethal type II hypersensitivity cytotoxic responsecalled hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) (Figure 19.5).For instance, if a person with type B blood receives a transfusion of type A blood, their anti-A antibodies will bind toand agglutinate the transfused RBCs. In addition, activation of the classical complement cascade will lead to a stronginflammatory response, and the complement membrane attack complex (MAC) will mediate massive hemolysis ofthe transfused RBCs. The debris from damaged and destroyed RBCs can occlude blood vessels in the alveoli of thelungs and the glomeruli of the kidneys. Within 1 to 24 hours of an incompatible transfusion, the patient experiencesfever, chills, pruritus (itching), urticaria (hives), dyspnea, hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin in the urine), and hypotension(low blood pressure). In the most serious reactions, dangerously low blood pressure can lead to shock, multi-organfailure, and death of the patient.Hospitals, medical centers, and associated clinical laboratories typically use hemovigilance systems to minimize therisk of HTRs due to clerical error. Hemovigilance systems are procedures that track transfusion information from thedonor source and blood products obtained to the follow-up of recipient patients. Hemovigilance systems used in manycountries identify HTRs and their outcomes through mandatory reporting (e.g., to the Food and Drug Administrationin the United States), and this information is valuable to help prevent such occurrences in the future. For example,if an HTR is found to be the result of laboratory or clerical error, additional blood products collected from the donorat that time can be located and labeled correctly to avoid additional HTRs. As a result of these measures, HTRassociateddeaths in the United States occur in about one per 2 million transfused units.[6]6. E.C. Vamvakas, M.A. Blajchman. “Transfusion-Related Mortality: The Ongoing Risks of Allogeneic Blood Transfusion and theAvailable Strategies for Their Prevention.” Blood 113 no. 15 (2009):3406–3417.826 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.5 A type II hypersensitivity hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) leading to hemolytic anemia. Blood froma type A donor is administered to a patient with type B blood. The anti-A isohemagglutinin IgM antibodies in therecipient bind to and agglutinate the incoming donor type A red blood cells. The bound anti-A antibodies activate theclassical complement cascade, resulting in destruction of the donor red blood cells.Rh FactorsMany different types of erythrocyte antigens have been discovered since the description of the ABO red cell antigens.The second most frequently described RBC antigens are Rh factors, named after the rhesus macaque (Macacamulatta) factors identified by Karl Landsteiner and Alexander Weiner in 1940. The Rh system of RBC antigens is themost complex and immunogenic blood group system, with more than 50 specificities identified to date. Of all the Rhantigens, the one designated Rho (Weiner) or D (Fisher-Race) is the most immunogenic. Cells are classified as Rhpositive (Rh+) if the Rho/D antigen is present or as Rh negative (Rh−) if the Rho/D antigen is absent. In contrast to thecarbohydrate molecules that distinguish the ABO blood groups and are the targets of IgM isohemagglutinins in HTRs,the Rh factor antigens are proteins. As discussed in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity, protein antigensactivate B cells and antibody production through a T-cell–dependent mechanism, and the TH2 cells stimulate classswitching from IgM to other antibody classes. In the case of Rh factor antigens, TH2 cells stimulate class switchingto IgG, and this has important implications for the mechanism of HDN.Like ABO incompatibilities, blood transfusions from a donor with the wrong Rh factor antigens can cause a type IIhypersensitivity HTR. However, in contrast to the IgM isohemagglutinins produced early in life through exposureto environmental antigens, production of anti-Rh factor antibodies requires the exposure of an individual with Rh−blood to Rh+ positive RBCs and activation of a primary antibody response. Although this primary antibody responsecan cause an HTR in the transfusion patient, the hemolytic reaction would be delayed up to 2 weeks during theextended lag period of a primary antibody response (B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity). However, ifthe patient receives a subsequent transfusion with Rh+ RBCs, a more rapid HTR would occur with anti-Rh factorantibody already present in the blood. Furthermore, the rapid secondary antibody response would provide even moreanti-Rh factor antibodies for the HTR.Rh factor incompatibility between mother and fetus can also cause a type II hypersensitivity hemolytic reaction,referred to as hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) (Figure 19.6). If an Rh− woman carries an Rh+ baby toterm, the mother’s immune system can be exposed to Rh+ fetal red blood cells. This exposure will usually occurduring the last trimester of pregnancy and during the delivery process. If this exposure occurs, the Rh+ fetal RBCswill activate a primary adaptive immune response in the mother, and anti-Rh factor IgG antibodies will be produced.IgG antibodies are the only class of antibody that can cross the placenta from mother to fetus; however, in most cases,the first Rh+ baby is unaffected by these antibodies because the first exposure typically occurs late enough in theChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 827pregnancy that the mother does not have time to mount a sufficient primary antibody response before the baby isborn.If a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus occurs, however, the mother’s second exposure to the Rh factor antigenscauses a strong secondary antibody response that produces larger quantities of anti-Rh factor IgG. These antibodiescan cross the placenta from mother to fetus and cause HDN, a potentially lethal condition for the baby (Figure 19.6).Prior to the development of techniques for diagnosis and prevention, Rh factor incompatibility was the most commoncause of HDN, resulting in thousands of infant deaths each year worldwide.[7] For this reason, the Rh factors ofprospective parents are regularly screened, and treatments have been developed to prevent HDN caused by Rhincompatibility. To prevent Rh factor-mediated HDN, human Rho(D) immune globulin (e.g., RhoGAM) is injectedintravenously or intramuscularly into the mother during the 28th week of pregnancy and within 72 hours afterdelivery. Additional doses may be administered after events that may result in transplacental hemorrhage (e.g.,umbilical blood sampling, chorionic villus sampling, abdominal trauma, amniocentesis). This treatment is initiatedduring the first pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus. The anti-Rh antibodies in Rho(D) immune globulin will bind to the Rhfactor of any fetal RBCs that gain access to the mother’s bloodstream, preventing these Rh+ cells from activating themother’s primary antibody response. Without a primary anti-Rh factor antibody response, the next pregnancy with anRh+ will have minimal risk of HDN. However, the mother will need to be retreated with Rho(D) immune globulinduring that pregnancy to prevent a primary anti-Rh antibody response that could threaten subsequent pregnancies.Figure 19.6 (a) When an Rh− mother has an Rh+ fetus, fetal erythrocytes are introduced into the mother’scirculatory system before or during birth, leading to production of anti-Rh IgG antibodies. These antibodies remain inthe mother and, if she becomes pregnant with a second Rh+ baby, they can cross the placenta and attach to fetalRh+ erythrocytes. Complement-mediated hemolysis of fetal erythrocytes results in a lack of sufficient cells for properoxygenation of the fetus. (b) HDN can be prevented by administering Rho(D) immune globulin during and after eachpregnancy with an Rh+ fetus. The immune globulin binds fetal Rh+ RBCs that gain access to the mother’sbloodstream, preventing activation of her primary immune response.7. G. Reali. “Forty Years of Anti-D Immunoprophylaxis.” Blood Transfusion 5 no. 1 (2007):3–6.828 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Use this interactive Blood Typing Game (https://openstax.org/l/22actbloodtyping) to reinforce your knowledge of blood typing.• What happens to cells that possess incompatible antigens in a type II hypersensitivity reaction?• Describe hemolytic disease of the newborn and explain how it can be prevented.Part 2Kerry’s primary care physician is not sure why Kerry seems to develop rashes after spending time in the sun,so she orders a urinalysis and basic blood tests. The results reveal that Kerry has proteinuria (abnormal proteinlevels in the urine), hemoglobinuria (excess hemoglobin in the urine), and a low hematocrit (RBC count). Thesetests suggest that Kerry is suffering from a mild bout of hemolytic anemia. The physician suspects that theproblem might be autoimmune, so she refers Kerry to a rheumatologist for additional testing and diagnosis.• Rheumatologists specialize in musculoskeletal diseases such as arthritis, osteoporosis, and joint pain.Why might Kerry’s physician refer her to this particular type of specialist even though she is exhibitingnone of these symptoms?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Type III HypersensitivitiesType III hypersensitivities are immune-complex reactions that were first characterized by Nicolas Maurice Arthus(1862–1945) in 1903. To produce antibodies for experimental procedures, Arthus immunized rabbits by injectingthem with serum from horses. However, while immunizing rabbits repeatedly with horse serum, Arthus noticed apreviously unreported and unexpected localized subcutaneous hemorrhage with edema at the site of injection. Thisreaction developed within 3 to10 hours after injection. This localized reaction to non-self serum proteins was calledan Arthus reaction. An Arthus reaction occurs when soluble antigens bind with IgG in a ratio that results in theaccumulation of antigen-antibody aggregates called immune complexes.A unique characteristic of type III hypersensitivity is antibody excess (primarily IgG), coupled with a relatively lowconcentration of antigen, resulting in the formation of small immune complexes that deposit on the surface of theepithelial cells lining the inner lumen of small blood vessels or on the surfaces of tissues (Figure 19.7). This immunecomplex accumulation leads to a cascade of inflammatory events that include the following:1. IgG binding to antibody receptors on localized mast cells, resulting in mast-cell degranulation2. Complement activation with production of pro-inflammatory C3a and C5a (see Chemical Defenses)3. Increased blood-vessel permeability with chemotactic recruitment of neutrophils and macrophagesBecause these immune complexes are not an optimal size and are deposited on cell surfaces, they cannot beLink to LearningClinical FocusChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 829phagocytosed in the usual way by neutrophils and macrophages, which, in turn, are often described as “frustrated.”Although phagocytosis does not occur, neutrophil degranulation results in the release of lysosomal enzymes that causeextracellular destruction of the immune complex, damaging localized cells in the process. Activation of coagulationpathways also occurs, resulting in thrombi (blood clots) that occlude blood vessels and cause ischemia that can leadto vascular necrosis and localized hemorrhage.Systemic type III hypersensitivity (serum sickness) occurs when immune complexes deposit in various body sites,resulting in a more generalized systemic inflammatory response. These immune complexes involve non-self proteinssuch as antibodies produced in animals for artificial passive immunity (see Vaccines), certain drugs, or microbialantigens that are continuously released over time during chronic infections (e.g., subacute bacterial endocarditis,chronic viral hepatitis). The mechanisms of serum sickness are similar to those described in localized type IIIhypersensitivity but involve widespread activation of mast cells, complement, neutrophils, and macrophages, whichcauses tissue destruction in areas such as the kidneys, joints, and blood vessels. As a result of tissue destruction,symptoms of serum sickness include chills, fever, rash, vasculitis, and arthritis. Development of glomerulonephritisor hepatitis is also possible.Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis can also involvedamaging type III hypersensitivity reactions when auto-antibodies form immune complexes with self antigens. Theseconditions are discussed in Autoimmune Disorders.Figure 19.7 Type III hypersensitivities and the systems they affect. (a) Immune complexes form and deposit intissue. Complement activation, stimulation of an inflammatory response, and recruitment and activation of neutrophilsresult in damage to blood vessels, heart tissue, joints, skin, and/or kidneys. (b) If the kidneys are damaged by a typeIII hypersensitivity reaction, dialysis may be required.• Why is antibody excess important in type III hypersensitivity?• Describe the differences between the Arthus reaction and serum sickness.830 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Diphtheria AntitoxinAntibacterial sera are much less commonly used now than in the past, having been replaced by toxoidvaccines. However, a diphtheria antitoxin produced in horses is one example of such a treatment that is stillused in some parts of the world. Although it is not licensed by the FDA for use in the United States, diphtheriaantitoxin can be used to treat cases of diphtheria, which are caused by the bacterium Corynebacteriumdiphtheriae.[8] The treatment is not without risks, however. Serum sickness can occur when the patientdevelops an immune response to non-self horse proteins. Immune complexes are formed between the horseproteins and circulating antibodies when the two exist in certain proportions. These immune complexes candeposit in organs, causing damage such as arthritis, nephritis, rash, and fever. Serum sickness is usuallytransient with no permanent damage unless the patient is chronically exposed to the antigen, which canthen result in irreversible damage to body sites such as joints and kidneys. Over time, phagocytic cells suchas macrophages are able to clear the horse serum antigens, which results in improvement of the patient’scondition and a decrease in symptoms as the immune response dissipates.Part 3Kerry does not make it to the rheumatologist. She has a seizure as she is leaving her primary care physician’soffice. She is quickly rushed to the emergency department, where her primary care physician relates hermedical history and recent test results. The emergency department physician calls in the rheumatologist onstaff at the hospital for consultation. Based on the symptoms and test results, the rheumatologist suspects thatKerry has lupus and orders a pair of blood tests: an antinuclear antibody test (ANA) to look for antibodies thatbind to DNA and another test that looks for antibodies that bind to a self-antigen called the Smith antigen (Sm).• Based on the blood tests ordered, what type of reaction does the rheumatologist suspect is causingKerry’s seizure?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Type IV HypersensitivitiesType IV hypersensitivities are not mediated by antibodies like the other three types of hypersensitivities. Rather,type IV hypersensitivities are regulated by T cells and involve the action of effector cells. These types ofhypersensitivities can be organized into three subcategories based on T-cell subtype, type of antigen, and the resultingeffector mechanism (Table 19.5).In the first type IV subcategory, CD4 TH1-mediated reactions are described as delayed-type hypersensitivities (DTH).The sensitization step involves the introduction of antigen into the skin and phagocytosis by local antigen presentingcells (APCs). The APCs activate helper T cells, stimulating clonal proliferation and differentiation into memoryTH1 cells. Upon subsequent exposure to the antigen, these sensitized memory TH1 cells release cytokines thatactivate macrophages, and activated macrophages are responsible for much of the tissue damage. Examples of thisTH1-mediated hypersensitivity are observed in tuberculin the Mantoux skin test and contact dermatitis, such asoccurs in latex allergy reactions.In the second type IV subcategory, CD4 TH2-mediated reactions result in chronic asthma or chronic allergic rhinitis.In these cases, the soluble antigen is first inhaled, resulting in eosinophil recruitment and activation with the releaseMicro ConnectionsClinical Focus8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Diphtheria Antitoxin.” http://www.cdc.gov/diphtheria/dat.html. Accessed March 25, 2016.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 831of cytokines and inflammatory mediators.In the third type IV subcategory, CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated reactions are associated with tissuetransplant rejection and contact dermatitis (Figure 19.8). For this form of cell-mediated hypersensitivity, APCsprocess and present the antigen with MHC I to naïve CD8 T cells. When these naïve CD8 T cells are activated, theyproliferate and differentiate into CTLs. Activated TH1 cells can also enhance the activation of the CTLs. The activatedCTLs then target and induce granzyme-mediated apoptosis in cells presenting the same antigen with MHC I. Thesetarget cells could be “self” cells that have absorbed the foreign antigen (such as with contact dermatitis due to poisonivy), or they could be transplanted tissue cells displaying foreign antigen from the donor.Figure 19.8 Exposure to hapten antigens in poison ivy can cause contact dermatitis, a type IV hypersensitivity. (a)The first exposure to poison ivy does not result in a reaction. However, sensitization stimulates helper T cells, leadingto production of memory helper T cells that can become reactivated on future exposures. (b) Upon secondaryexposure, the memory helper T cells become reactivated, producing inflammatory cytokines that stimulatemacrophages and cytotoxic T cells to induce an inflammatory lesion at the exposed site. This lesion, which will persistuntil the allergen is removed, can inflict significant tissue damage if it continues long enough.Type IV HypersensitivitiesSubcategory Antigen Effector Mechanism Examples1 SolubleantigenActivated macrophages damagetissue and promote inflammatoryresponseContact dermatitis (e.g., exposure tolatex) and delayed-type hypersensitivity(e.g., tuberculin reaction)2 SolubleantigenEosinophil recruitment andactivation release cytokines andpro-inflammatory chemicalsChronic asthma and chronic allergicrhinitisTable 19.5832 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Type IV HypersensitivitiesSubcategory Antigen Effector Mechanism Examples3 CellassociatedantigenCTL-mediated cytotoxicity Contact dermatitis (e.g., contact withpoison ivy) and tissue-transplant rejectionTable 19.5• Describe the three subtypes of type IV hypersensitivity.• Explain how T cells contribute to tissue damage in type IV hypersensitivity.Using Delayed Hypersensitivity to Test for TBAustrian pediatrician Clemans von Pirquet (1874–1929) first described allergy mechanisms, including typeIII serum sickness.[9] His interest led to the development of a test for tuberculosis (TB), using the tuberculinantigen, based on earlier work identifying the TB pathogen performed by Robert Koch. Pirquet’s methodinvolved scarification, which results in simultaneous multiple punctures, using a device with an array of needlesto break the skin numerous times in a small area. The device Pirquet used was similar to the tine test devicewith four needles seen in Figure 19.9.The tips of all the needles in the array are coated with tuberculin, a protein extract of TB bacteria, effectivelyintroducing the tuberculin into the skin. One to 3 days later, the area can be examined for a delayedhypersensitivity reaction, signs of which include swelling and redness.As you can imagine, scarification was not a pleasant experience,[10] and the numerous skin punctures putthe patient at risk of developing bacterial infection of the skin. Mantoux modified Pirquet’s test to use a singlesubcutaneous injection of purified tuberculin material. A positive test, which is indicated by a delayed localizedswelling at the injection site, does not necessarily mean that the patient is currently infected with active TB.Because type IV (delayed-type) hypersensitivity is mediated by reactivation of memory T cells, such cells mayhave been created recently (due to an active current infection) or years prior (if a patient had TB and hadspontaneously cleared it, or if it had gone into latency). However, the test can be used to confirm infection incases in which symptoms in the patient or findings on a radiograph suggest its presence.Micro Connections9. B. Huber “100 Jahre Allergie: Clemens von Pirquet–sein Allergiebegriff und das ihm zugrunde liegende Krankheitsverständnis.” WienerKlinische Wochenschrift 118 no. 19–20 (2006):573–579.10. C.A. Stewart. “The Pirquet Test: Comparison of the Scarification and the Puncture Methods of Application.” Archives of Pediatrics &Adolescent Medicine 35 no. 3 (1928):388–391.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 833Figure 19.9 The modern version of Pirquet’s scarification is the tine test, which uses devices like this toadminister tuberculin antigen into the skin, usually on the inside of the forearm. The tine test is consideredless reliable than the Mantoux test. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Hypersensitivity PneumonitisSome disease caused by hypersensitivities are not caused exclusively by one type. For example, hypersensitivitypneumonitis (HP), which is often an occupational or environmental disease, occurs when the lungs become inflameddue to an allergic reaction to inhaled dust, endospores, bird feathers, bird droppings, molds, or chemicals. HP goes bymany different names associated with various forms of exposure (Figure 19.10). HP associated with bird droppingsis sometimes called pigeon fancier’s lung or poultry worker’s lung—both common in bird breeders and handlers.Cheese handler’s disease, farmer’s lung, sauna takers' disease, and hot-tub lung are other names for HP associatedwith exposure to molds in various environments.Pathology associated with HP can be due to both type III (mediated by immune complexes) and type IV (mediatedby TH1 cells and macrophages) hypersensitivities. Repeated exposure to allergens can cause alveolitis due to theformation of immune complexes in the alveolar wall of the lung accompanied by fluid accumulation, and theformation of granulomas and other lesions in the lung as a result of TH1-mediated macrophage activation. Alveolitiswith fluid and granuloma formation results in poor oxygen perfusion in the alveoli, which, in turn, can causesymptoms such as coughing, dyspnea, chills, fever, sweating, myalgias, headache, and nausea. Symptoms may occuras quickly as 2 hours after exposure and can persist for weeks if left untreated.834 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.10 Occupational exposure to dust, mold, and other allergens can result in hypersensitivity pneumonitis.(a) People exposed daily to large numbers of birds may be susceptible to poultry worker’s lung. (b) Workers in acheese factory may become sensitized to different types of molds and develop cheese handler’s disease. (credit a:modification of work by The Global Orphan Project)• Explain why hypersensitivity pneumonitis is considered an occupational disease.Figure 19.11 summarizes the mechanisms and effects of each type of hypersensitivity discussed in this section.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 835Figure 19.11 Components of the immune system cause four types of hypersensitivities. Notice that types I–III are Bcell/antibody-mediated hypersensitivities, whereas type IV hypersensitivity is exclusively a T-cell phenomenon.Diagnosis of HypersensitivitiesDiagnosis of type I hypersensitivities is a complex process requiring several diagnostic tests in addition to a welldocumentedpatient history. Serum IgE levels can be measured, but elevated IgE alone does not confirm allergicdisease. As part of the process to identify the antigens responsible for a type I reaction allergy, testing through aprick puncture skin test (PPST) or an intradermal test can be performed. PPST is carried out with the introduction ofallergens in a series of superficial skin pricks on the patient’s back or arms (Figure 19.12). PPSTs are considered tobe the most convenient and least expensive way to diagnose allergies, according to the US Joint Council of Allergyand the European Academy of Allergy and Immunology. The second type of testing, the intradermal test, requiresinjection into the dermis with a small needle. This needle, also known as a tuberculin needle, is attached to a syringecontaining a small amount of allergen. Both the PPST and the intradermal tests are observed for 15–20 minutes fora wheal-flare reaction to the allergens. Measurement of any wheal (a raised, itchy bump) and flare (redness) withinminutes indicates a type I hypersensitivity, and the larger the wheal-flare reaction, the greater the patient’s sensitivityto the allergen.Type III hypersensitivities can often be misdiagnosed because of their nonspecific inflammatory nature. Thesymptoms are easily visible, but they may be associated with any of a number of other diseases. A strong,comprehensive patient history is crucial to proper and accurate diagnosis. Tests used to establish the diagnosisof hypersensitivity pneumonitis (resulting from type III hypersensitivity) include bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL),pulmonary function tests, and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT).836 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.12 Results of an allergy skin-prick test to test for type I hypersensitivity to a group of potential allergens. Apositive result is indicated by a raised area (wheal) and surrounding redness (flare). (credit: modification of work by“OakleyOriginals”/Flickr)• Describe the prick puncture skin test.• Explain why type III hypersensitivities can be difficult to diagnose.Treatments of HypersensitivitiesAllergic reactions can be treated in various ways. Prevention of allergic reactions can be achieved by desensitization(hyposensitization) therapy, which can be used to reduce the hypersensitivity reaction through repeated injections ofallergens. Extremely dilute concentrations of known allergens (determined from the allergen tests) are injected intothe patient at prescribed intervals (e.g., weekly). The quantity of allergen delivered by the shots is slowly increasedover a buildup period until an effective dose is determined and that dose is maintained for the duration of treatment,which can last years. Patients are usually encouraged to remain in the doctor’s office for 30 minutes after receivingthe injection in case the allergens administered cause a severe systemic reaction. Doctors’ offices that administerdesensitization therapy must be prepared to provide resuscitation and drug treatment in the case of such an event.Desensitization therapy is used for insect sting allergies and environmental allergies. The allergy shots elicit theproduction of different interleukins and IgG antibody responses instead of IgE. When excess allergen-specific IgGantibodies are produced and bind to the allergen, they can act as blocking antibodies to neutralize the allergen beforeit can bind IgE on mast cells. There are early studies using oral therapy for desensitization of food allergies that arepromising.[11][12] These studies involve feeding children who have allergies tiny amounts of the allergen (e.g., peanut11. C.L. Schneider et al. “A Pilot Study of Omalizumab to Facilitate Rapid Oral Desensitization in High-Risk Peanut-Allergic Patients.”Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 132 no. 6 (2013):1368–1374.12. P. Varshney et al. “A Randomized Controlled Study of Peanut Oral Immunotherapy: Clinical Desensitization and Modulation of theAllergic Response.” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 127 no. 3 (2011):654–660.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 837flour) or related proteins over time. Many of the subjects show reduced severity of reaction to the food allergen afterthe therapy.There are also therapies designed to treat severe allergic reactions. Emergency systemic anaphylaxis is treated initiallywith an epinephrine injection, which can counteract the drop in blood pressure. Individuals with known severeallergies often carry a self-administering auto-injector that can be used in case of exposure to the allergen (e.g., aninsect sting or accidental ingestion of a food that causes a severe reaction). By self-administering an epinephrine shot(or sometimes two), the patient can stem the reaction long enough to seek medical attention. Follow-up treatmentgenerally involves giving the patient antihistamines and slow-acting corticosteroids for several days after the reactionto prevent potential late-phase reactions. However, the effects of antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment are notwell studied and are used based on theoretical considerations.Treatment of milder allergic reactions typically involves antihistamines and other anti-inflammatory drugs. A varietyof antihistamine drugs are available, in both prescription and over-the-counter strengths. There are alsoantileukotriene and antiprostaglandin drugs that can be used in tandem with antihistamine drugs in a combined (andmore effective) therapy regime.Treatments of type III hypersensitivities include preventing further exposure to the antigen and the use of antiinflammatorydrugs. Some conditions can be resolved when exposure to the antigen is prevented. Anti-inflammatorycorticosteroid inhalers can also be used to diminish inflammation to allow lung lesions to heal. Systemiccorticosteroid treatment, oral or intravenous, is also common for type III hypersensitivities affecting body systems.Treatment of hypersensitivity pneumonitis includes avoiding the allergen, along with the possible addition ofprescription steroids such as prednisone to reduce inflammation.Treatment of type IV hypersensitivities includes antihistamines, anti-inflammatory drugs, analgesics, and, if possible,eliminating further exposure to the antigen.• Describe desensitization therapy.• Explain the role of epinephrine in treatment of hypersensitivity reactions.19.2 Autoimmune DisordersLearning Objectives• Explain why autoimmune disorders develop• Provide a few examples of organ-specific and systemic autoimmune diseasesIn 1970, artist Walt Kelly developed a poster promoting Earth Day, featuring a character from Pogo, his dailynewspaper comic strip. In the poster, Pogo looks out across a litter-strewn forest and says wryly, “We have met theenemy and he is us.” Pogo was not talking about the human immune system, but he very well could have been.Although the immune system protects the body by attacking invading “enemies” (pathogens), in some cases, theimmune system can mistakenly identify the body’s own cells as the enemy, resulting in autoimmune disease.Autoimmune diseases are those in which the body is attacked by its own specific adaptive immune response. Innormal, healthy states, the immune system induces tolerance, which is a lack of an anti-self immune response.However, with autoimmunity, there is a loss of immune tolerance, and the mechanisms responsible for autoimmunediseases include type II, III, and IV hypersensitivity reactions. Autoimmune diseases can have a variety of mixedsymptoms that flare up and disappear, making diagnosis difficult.The causes of autoimmune disease are a combination of the individual's genetic makeup and the effect ofenvironmental influences, such as sunlight, infections, medications, and environmental chemicals. However, the838 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5vagueness of this list reflects our poor understanding of the etiology of these diseases. Except in a very few specificdiseases, the initiation event(s) of most autoimmune states has not been fully characterized.There are several possible causes for the origin of autoimmune diseases and autoimmunity is likely due to severalfactors. Evidence now suggests that regulatory T and B cells play an essential role in the maintenance of toleranceand prevention of autoimmune responses. The regulatory T cells are especially important for inhibiting autoreactiveT cells that are not eliminated during thymic selection and escape the thymus (see T Lymphocytes and CellularImmunity). In addition, antigen mimicry between pathogen antigens and our own self antigens can lead to crossreactivityand autoimmunity. Hidden self-antigens may become exposed because of trauma, drug interactions, ordisease states, and trigger an autoimmune response. All of these factors could contribute to autoimmunity. Ultimately,damage to tissues and organs in the autoimmune disease state comes as a result of inflammatory responses that areinappropriate; therefore, treatment often includes immunosuppressive drugs and corticosteroids.Organ-Specific Autoimmune DiseasesSome autoimmune diseases are considered organ specific, meaning that the immune system targets specific organsor tissues. Examples of organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease, Graves disease, Hashimotothyroiditis, type I diabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.Celiac DiseaseCeliac disease is largely a disease of the small intestine, although other organs may be affected. People in their 30s and40s, and children are most commonly affected, but celiac disease can begin at any age. It results from a reaction toproteins, commonly called gluten, found mainly in wheat, barley, rye, and some other grains. The disease has severalgenetic causes (predispositions) and poorly understood environmental influences. On exposure to gluten, the bodyproduces various autoantibodies and an inflammatory response. The inflammatory response in the small intestineleads to a reduction in the depth of the microvilli of the mucosa, which hinders absorption and can lead to weight lossand anemia. The disease is also characterized by diarrhea and abdominal pain, symptoms that are often misdiagnosedas irritable bowel syndrome.Diagnosis of celiac disease is accomplished from serological tests for the presence of primarily IgA antibodiesto components of gluten, the transglutinaminase enzyme, and autoantibodies to endomysium, a connective tissuesurrounding muscle fibers. Serological tests are typically followed up with endoscopy and biopsy of the duodenalmucosa. Serological screening surveys have found about 1% of individuals in the United Kingdom are positive eventhough they do not all display symptoms.[13] This early recognition allows for more careful monitoring and preventionof severe disease.Celiac disease is treated with complete removal of gluten-containing foods from the diet, which results in improvedsymptoms and reduced risk of complications. Other theoretical approaches include breeding grains that do not containthe immunologically reactive components or developing dietary supplements that contain enzymes that break downthe protein components that cause the immune response.[14]Disorders of the ThyroidGraves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the United States. Symptoms of Graves diseaseresult from the production of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) also called TSH-receptor antibody. TSItargets and binds to the receptor for thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), which is naturally produced by thepituitary gland. TSI may cause conflicting symptoms because it may stimulate the thyroid to make too much thyroidhormone or block thyroid hormone production entirely, making diagnosis more difficult. Signs and symptoms ofGraves disease include heat intolerance, rapid and irregular heartbeat, weight loss, goiter (a swollen thyroid gland,protruding under the skin of the throat [Figure 19.13]) and exophthalmia (bulging eyes) often referred to as Graves13. D.A. Van Heel, J. West. “Recent Advances in Coeliac Disease.” Gut 55 no. 7 (2006):1037—1046.14. ibid.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 839ophthalmopathy (Figure 19.14).The most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States is Hashimoto thyroiditis, also called chroniclymphocytic thyroiditis. Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis often develop a spectrum of different diseases becausethey are more likely to develop additional autoimmune diseases such as Addison disease (discussed later in thissection), type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and celiac disease. Hashimoto thyroiditis is a TH1 cell-mediated diseasethat occurs when the thyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic lymphocytes, macrophages, and autoantibodies. Thisautoimmune response leads to numerous symptoms that include goiter (Figure 19.13), cold intolerance, muscleweakness, painful and stiff joints, depression, and memory loss.Figure 19.13 Goiter, a hypertrophy of the thyroid, is a symptom of Graves disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis.Figure 19.14 Exophthalmia, or Graves ophthalmopathy, is a sign of Graves disease. (credit: modification of work byJonathan Trobe, University of Michigan Kellogg Eye Center)Type 1 DiabetesJuvenile diabetes, or type 1 diabetes mellitus, is usually diagnosed in children and young adults. It is a T-celldependentautoimmune disease characterized by the selective destruction of the β cells of the islets of Langerhansin the pancreas by CD4 TH1-mediated CD8 T cells, anti-β-cell antibodies, and macrophage activity. There is alsoevidence that viral infections can have either a potentiating or inhibitory role in the development of type 1 diabetes(T1D) mellitus. The destruction of the β cells causes a lack of insulin production by the pancreas. In T1D, β-cell destruction may take place over several years, but symptoms of hyperglycemia, extreme increase in thirst andurination, weight loss, and extreme fatigue usually have a sudden onset, and diagnosis usually does not occur untilmost β cells have already been destroyed.840 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Autoimmune Addison DiseaseDestruction of the adrenal glands (the glands lying above the kidneys that produce glucocorticoids,mineralocorticoids, and sex steroids) is the cause of Addison disease, also called primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI).Today, up to 80% of Addison disease cases are diagnosed as autoimmune Addison disease (AAD), which is causedby an autoimmune response to adrenal tissues disrupting adrenal function. Disruption of adrenal function causesimpaired metabolic processes that require normal steroid hormone levels, causing signs and symptoms throughoutthe body. There is evidence that both humoral and CD4 TH1-driven CD8 T-cell–mediated immune mechanismsare directed at the adrenal cortex in AAD. There is also evidence that the autoimmune response is associated withautoimmune destruction of other endocrine glands as well, such as the pancreas and thyroid, conditions collectivelyreferred to as autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS). In up to 80% of patients with AAD, antibodies areproduced to three enzymes involved in steroid synthesis: 21-hydroxylase (21-OH), 17α-hydroxylase, and cholesterolside-chain–cleaving enzyme.[15] The most common autoantibody found in AAD is to 21-OH, and antibodies to any ofthe key enzymes for steroid production are diagnostic for AAD. The adrenal cortex cells are targeted, destroyed, andreplaced with fibrous tissue by immune-mediated inflammation. In some patients, at least 90% of the adrenal cortexis destroyed before symptoms become diagnostic.Symptoms of AAD include weakness, nausea, decreased appetite, weight loss, hyperpigmentation (Figure 19.15),hyperkalemia (elevated blood potassium levels), hyponatremia (decreased blood sodium levels), hypoglycemia(decreased levels of blood sugar), hypotension (decreased blood pressure), anemia, lymphocytosis (decreased levelsof white blood cells), and fatigue. Under extreme stress, such as surgery, accidental trauma, or infection, patientswith AAD may experience an adrenal crisis that causes the patient to vomit, experience abdominal pain, back or legcramps, and even severe hypotension leading to shock.Figure 19.15 Hyperpigmentation is a sign of Addison disease. (credit: modification of work by Petros Perros)• What are the names of autoimmune diseases that interfere with hormone gland function?• Describe how the mechanisms of Graves disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis differ.• Name the cells that are destroyed in type 1 diabetes mellitus and describe the result.Systemic Autoimmune DiseasesWhereas organ-specific autoimmune diseases target specific organs or tissues, systemic autoimmune diseases are15. P. Martorell et al. “Autoimmunity in Addison’s Disease.” Netherlands Journal of Medicine 60 no. 7 (2002):269—275.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 841more generalized, targeting multiple organs or tissues throughout the body. Examples of systemic autoimmunediseases include multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupuserythematosus.Multiple SclerosisMultiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune central nervous system disease that affects the brain and spinal cord.Lesions in multiple locations within the central nervous system are a hallmark of multiple sclerosis and are causedby infiltration of immune cells across the blood-brain barrier. The immune cells include T cells that promoteinflammation, demyelination, and neuron degeneration, all of which disrupt neuronal signaling. Symptoms of MSinclude visual disturbances; muscle weakness; difficulty with coordination and balance; sensations such as numbness,prickling, or “pins and needles”; and cognitive and memory problems.Myasthenia GravisAutoantibodies directed against acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) in the synaptic cleft of neuromuscular junctionslead to myasthenia gravis (Figure 19.16). Anti-AChR antibodies are high-affinity IgGs and their synthesis requiresactivated CD4 T cells to interact with and stimulate B cells. Once produced, the anti-AChR antibodies affectneuromuscular transmission by at least three mechanisms:• Complement binding and activation at the neuromuscular junction• Accelerated AChR endocytosis of molecules cross-linked by antibodies• Functional AChR blocking, which prevents normal acetylcholine attachment to, and activation of, AChRRegardless of the mechanism, the effect of anti-AChR is extreme muscle weakness and potentially death throughrespiratory arrest in severe cases.842 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.16 Myasthenia gravis and impaired muscle contraction. (a) Normal release of the neurotransmitteracetylcholine stimulates muscle contraction. (b) In myasthenia gravis, autoantibodies block the receptors foracetylcholine (AChr) on muscle cells, resulting in paralysis.PsoriasisPsoriasis is a skin disease that causes itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with silvery scales on elbows, knees,scalp, back, face, palms, feet, and sometimes other areas. Some individuals with psoriasis also get a form of arthritiscalled psoriatic arthritis, in which the joints can become inflamed. Psoriasis results from the complex interplaybetween keratinocytes, dendritic cells, and T cells, and the cytokines produced by these various cells. In a processcalled cell turnover, skin cells that grow deep in the skin rise to the surface. Normally, this process takes a month. Inpsoriasis, as a result of cytokine activation, cell turnover happens in just a few days. The thick inflamed patches ofskin that are characteristic of psoriasis develop because the skin cells rise too fast.Rheumatoid ArthritisThe most common chronic inflammatory joint disease is rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (Figure 19.17) and it is stilla major medical challenge because of unsolved questions related to the environmental and genetic causes of thedisease. RA involves type III hypersensitivity reactions and the activation of CD4 T cells, resulting in chronic releaseof the inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). The activated CD4 T cells alsostimulate the production of rheumatoid factor (RF) antibodies and anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP) that form immune complexes. Increased levels of acute-phase proteins, such as C-reactive protein (CRP), arealso produced as part of the inflammatory process and participate in complement fixation with the antibodies on theimmune complexes. The formation of immune complexes and reaction to the immune factors cause an inflammatoryprocess in joints, particularly in the hands, feet, and legs. Diagnosis of RA is based on elevated levels of RF, anti-CCP, quantitative CRP, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (modifiedWestergren). In addition, radiographs,ultrasound, or magnetic resonance imaging scans can identify joint damage, such as erosions, a loss of bone withinChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 843the joint, and narrowing of joint space.Figure 19.17 The radiograph (left) and photograph (right) show damage to the hands typical of rheumatoid arthritis.(credit right: modification of work by “handarmdoc”/Flickr)Systemic Lupus ErythematosusThe damage and pathology of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is caused by type III hypersensitivity reactions.Autoantibodies produced in SLE are directed against nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Anti-nuclear antibodies(ANAs) are present in more than 95% of patients with SLE,[16] with additional autoantibodies including antidouble–stranded DNA (ds-DNA) and anti-Sm antibodies (antibodies to small nuclear ribonucleoprotein). Anti-ds-DNA and anti-Sm antibodies are unique to patients with SLE; thus, their presence is included in the classificationcriteria of SLE. Cellular interaction with autoantibodies leads to nuclear and cellular destruction, with componentsreleased after cell death leading to the formation of immune complexes.Because autoantibodies in SLE can target a wide variety of cells, symptoms of SLE can occur in many body locations.However, the most common symptoms include fatigue, fever with no other cause, hair loss, and a sunlight-sensitive"butterfly" or wolf-mask (lupus) rash that is found in about 50% of people with SLE (Figure 19.18). The rash is mostoften seen over the cheeks and bridge of the nose, but can be widespread. Other symptoms may appear dependingon affected areas. The joints may be affected, leading to arthritis of the fingers, hands, wrists, and knees. Effects onthe brain and nervous system can lead to headaches, numbness, tingling, seizures, vision problems, and personalitychanges. There may also be abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, arrhythmias, shortness of breath, and blood in thesputum. Effects on the skin can lead to additional areas of skin lesions, and vasoconstriction can cause color changesin the fingers when they are cold (Raynaud phenomenon). Effects on the kidneys can lead to edema in the legsand weight gain. A diagnosis of SLE depends on identification of four of 11 of the most common symptoms andconfirmed production of an array of autoantibodies unique to SLE. A positive test for ANAs alone is not diagnostic.16. C.C. Mok, C.S. Lau. “Pathogenesis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.” Journal of Clinical Pathology 56 no. 7 (2003):481—490.844 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.18 (a) Systemic lupus erythematosus is characterized by autoimmunity to the individual’s own DNA and/or proteins. (b) This patient is presenting with a butterfly rash, one of the characteristic signs of lupus. (credit a:modification of work by Mikael Häggström; credit b: modification of work by Shrestha D, Dhakal AK, Shiva RK,Shakya A, Shah SC, Shakya H)• List the ways antibodies contribute to the pathogenesis of myasthenia gravis.• Explain why rheumatoid arthritis is considered a type III hypersensitivity.• Describe the symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus and explain why they affect so many different partsof the body.• What is recognized as an antigen in myasthenia gravis?Table 19.6 summarizes the causes, signs, and symptoms of select autoimmune diseases.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 845Select Autoimmune DiseasesDisease Cause Signs and SymptomsAddisondiseaseDestruction of adrenal gland cells by cytotoxicT cellsWeakness, nausea, hypotension, fatigue;adrenal crisis with severe pain in abdomen,lower back, and legs; circulatory systemcollapse, kidney failureCeliac disease Antibodies to gluten become autoantibodiesthat target cells of the small intestineSevere diarrhea, abdominal pain, anemia,malnutritionDiabetesmellitus(type I)Cytotoxic T-cell destruction of the insulinproducingβ cells of the pancreasHyperglycemia, extreme increase in thirstand urination, weight loss, extreme fatigueGravesdiseaseAutoantibodies target thyroid-stimulatinghormone receptors, resulting inoverstimulation of the thyroidHyperthyroidism with rapid and irregularheartbeat, heat intolerance, weight loss,goiter, exophthalmiaHashimotothyroiditisThyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic T cells,lymphocytes, macrophages, andautoantibodiesThyroiditis with goiter, cold intolerance,muscle weakness, painful and stiff joints,depression, memory lossMultiplesclerosis (MS)Cytotoxic T-cell destruction of the myelinsheath surrounding nerve axons in the centralnervous systemVisual disturbances, muscle weakness,impaired coordination and balance,numbness, prickling or “pins and needles”sensations, impaired cognitive function andmemoryMyastheniagravisAutoantibodies directed against acetylcholinereceptors within the neuromuscular junctionExtreme muscle weakness eventuallyleading to fatal respiratory arrestPsoriasis Cytokine activation of keratinocytes causesrapid and excessive epidermal cell turnoverItchy or sore patches of thick, red skin withsilvery scales; commonly affects elbows,knees, scalp, back, face, palms, feetRheumatoidarthritisAutoantibodies, immune complexes,complement activation, phagocytes, and Tcells damage membranes and bone in jointsJoint inflammation, pain and disfigurement,chronic systemic inflammationSystemiclupuserythematosus(SLE)Autoantibodies directed against nuclear andcytoplasmic molecules form immunecomplexes that deposit in tissues. Phagocyticcells and complement activation cause tissuedamage and inflammationFatigue, fever, joint pain and swelling, hairloss, anemia, clotting, a sunlight-sensitive"butterfly" rash, skin lesions,photosensitivity, decreased kidney function,memory loss, confusion, depressionTable 19.619.3 Organ Transplantation and RejectionLearning Objectives• Explain why human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) are important in tissue transplantation• Explain the types of grafts possible and their potential for interaction with the immune system• Describe what occurs during graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)A graft is the transplantation of an organ or tissue to a different location, with the goal of replacing a missing ordamaged organ or tissue. Grafts are typically moved without their attachments to the circulatory system and mustreestablish these, in addition to the other connections and interactions with their new surrounding tissues. There846 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5are different types of grafts depending on the source of the new tissue or organ. Tissues that are transplanted fromone genetically distinct individual to another within the same species are called allografts. An interesting variantof the allograft is an isograft, in which tissue from one twin is transplanted to another. As long as the twins aremonozygotic (therefore, essentially genetically identical), the transplanted tissue is virtually never rejected. If tissuesare transplanted from one area on an individual to another area on the same individual (e.g., a skin graft on aburn patient), it is known as an autograft. If tissues from an animal are transplanted into a human, this is called axenograft.Transplant RejectionThe different types of grafts described above have varying risks for rejection (Table 19.7). Rejection occurs whenthe recipient’s immune system recognizes the donor tissue as foreign (non-self), triggering an immune response. Themajor histocompatibility complex markers MHC I and MHC II, more specifically identified as human leukocyteantigens (HLAs), play a role in transplant rejection. The HLAs expressed in tissue transplanted from a geneticallydifferent individual or species may be recognized as non-self molecules by the host’s dendritic cells. If this occurs,the dendritic cells will process and present the foreign HLAs to the host’s helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, therebyactivating them. Cytotoxic T cells then target and kill the grafted cells through the same mechanism they use to killvirus-infected cells; helper T cells may also release cytokines that activate macrophages to kill graft cells.Types of Tissue and Organ Grafts and Their ComplicationsGraft Procedure ComplicationsAutograft From self to self No rejection concernsIsograft From identical twin to twin Little concern of rejectionAllograft From relative or nonrelative to individual Rejection possibleXenograft From animal to human Rejection possibleTable 19.7With the three highly polymorphic MHC I genes in humans (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C) determining compatibility,each with many alleles segregating in a population, odds are extremely low that a randomly chosen donor will matcha recipient's six-allele genotype (the two alleles at each locus are expressed codominantly). This is why a parent or asibling may be the best donor in many situations—a genetic match between the MHC genes is much more likely andthe organ is much less likely to be rejected.Although matching all of the MHC genes can lower the risk for rejection, there are a number of additional geneproducts that also play a role in stimulating responses against grafted tissue. Because of this, no non-self grafted tissueis likely to completely avoid rejection. However, the more similar the MHC gene match, the more likely the graft is tobe tolerated for a longer time. Most transplant recipients, even those with tissues well matched to their MHC genes,require treatment with immunosuppressant drugs for the rest of their lives. This can make them more vulnerable thanthe general population to complications from infectious diseases. It can also result in transplant-related malignanciesbecause the body’s normal defenses against cancer cells are being suppressed.• What part of the immune response is responsible for graft rejection?• Explain why blood relatives are preferred as organ donors.• Describe the role of immunosuppression in transplantation.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 847Graft-versus-Host DiseaseA form of rejection called graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) primarily occurs in recipients of bone marrowtransplants and peripheral blood stem cells. GHVD presents a unique situation because the transplanted tissue iscapable of producing immune cells; APCs in the donated bone marrow may recognize the host cells as non-self,leading to activation of the donor cytotoxic T cells. Once activated, the donor’s T cells attack the recipient cells,causing acute GVHD.Acute GVHD typically develops within weeks after a bone marrow transplant, causing tissue damage affecting theskin, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and eyes. In addition, acute GVHD may also lead to a cytokine storm, an unregulatedsecretion of cytokines that may be fatal. In addition to acute GVHD, there is also the risk for chronic GVHDdeveloping months after the bone marrow transplant. The mechanisms responsible for chronic GVHD are not wellunderstood.To minimize the risk of GVHD, it is critically important to match the HLAs of the host and donor as closely aspossible in bone marrow transplants. In addition, the donated bone marrow is processed before grafting to remove asmany donor APCs and T cells as possible, leaving mostly hematopoietic stem cells.• Why does GVHD occur in specifically in bone marrow transplants?• What cells are responsible for GVHD?The Future of TransplantationHistorically speaking, the practice of transplanting tissues—and the complications that can accompany suchprocedures—is a relatively recent development. It was not until 1954 that the first successful organ transplantationbetween two humans was achieved. Yet the field of organ transplantation has progressed rapidly since that time.Nonetheless, the practice of transplanting non-self tissues may soon become obsolete. Scientists are now attemptingto develop methods by which new organs may be grown in vitro from an individual’s own harvested cells to replacedamaged or abnormal ones. Because organs produced in this way would contain the individual’s own cells, they couldbe transplanted into the individual without risk for rejection.An alternative approach that is gaining renewed research interest is genetic modification of donor animals, such aspigs, to provide transplantable organs that do not elicit an immune response in the recipient. The approach involvesexcising the genes in the pig (in the embryo) that are most responsible for the rejection reaction after transplantation.Finding these genes and effectively removing them is a challenge, however. So too is identifying and neutralizingrisks from viral sequences that might be embedded in the pig genome, posing a risk for infection in the humanrecipient.There are currently more than a dozen different tissues and organs used inhuman transplantations. Learn more about them at this (https://openstax.org/l/22organstransp) website.Link to Learning848 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5ResolutionKerry's tests come back positive, confirming a diagnosis of lupus, a disease that occurs 10 times morefrequently in women than men. SLE cannot be cured, but there are various therapies available for reducingand managing its symptoms. Specific therapies are prescribed based on the particular symptoms presentingin the patient. Kerry's rheumatologist starts her therapy with a low dose of corticosteroids to reduce herrashes. She also prescribes a low dose of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-inflammatory drug that is used totreat inflammation in patients with RA, childhood arthritis, SLE, and other autoimmune diseases. Although themechanism of action of hydroxychloroquine is not well defined, it appears that this drug interferes with theprocesses of antigen processing and activation of autoimmunity. Because of its mechanism, the effects ofhydroxychloroquine are not as immediate as that of other anti-inflammatory drugs, but it is still considered agood companion therapy for SLE. Kerry’s doctor also advises her to limit her exposure to sunlight, becausephotosensitivity to sunlight may precipitate rashes.Over the next 6 months, Kerry follows her treatment plan and her symptoms do not return. However, futureflare-ups are likely to occur. She will need to continue her treatment for the rest of her life and seek medicalattention whenever new symptoms develop.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.19.4 ImmunodeficiencyLearning Objectives• Compare the causes of primary and secondary immunodeficiencies• Describe treatments for primary and secondary immunodeficienciesImmunodeficiencies are inherited (primary) or acquired (secondary) disorders in which elements of host immunedefenses are either absent or functionally defective. In developed countries, most immunodeficiencies are inherited,and they are usually first seen in the clinic as recurrent or overwhelming infections in infants. However, ona global scale, malnutrition is the most common cause of immunodeficiency and would be categorized as anacquired immunodeficiency. Acquired immunodeficiencies are more likely to develop later in life, and the pathogenicmechanisms of many remain obscure.Primary ImmunodeficiencyPrimary immunodeficiencies, which number more than 250, are caused by inherited defects of either nonspecificinnate or specific adaptive immune defenses. In general, patients born with primary immunodeficiency (PI)commonly have an increased susceptibility to infection. This susceptibility can become apparent shortly afterbirth or in early childhood for some individuals, whereas other patients develop symptoms later in life. Someprimary immunodeficiencies are due to a defect of a single cellular or humoral component of the immune system;others may result from defects of more than one component. Examples of primary immunodeficiencies includechronic granulomatous disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, selective IgA deficiency, and severe combinedimmunodeficiency disease.Chronic Granulomatous DiseaseThe causes of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) are defects in the NADPH oxidase system of phagocytic cells,including neutrophils and macrophages, that prevent the production of superoxide radicals in phagolysosomes. Theinability to produce superoxide radicals impairs the antibacterial activity of phagocytes. As a result, infections inClinical FocusChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 849patients with CGD persist longer, leading to a chronic local inflammation called a granuloma. Microorganisms thatare the most common causes of infections in patients with CGD include Aspergillus spp., Staphylococcus aureus,Chromobacterium violaceum, Serratia marcescens, and Salmonella typhimurium.X-Linked AgammaglobulinemiaDeficiencies in B cells due to defective differentiation lead to a lack of specific antibody production known asX-linked agammaglobulinemia. In 1952, Ogden C. Bruton (1908–2003) described the first immunodeficiency ina boy whose immune system failed to produce antibodies. This defect is inherited on the X chromosome and ischaracterized by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum; it is called Bruton X-linked agammaglobulinemia(XLA). The defective gene, BTK, in XLA is now known to encode a tyrosine kinase called Bruton tyrosinekinase (Btk). In patients whose B cells are unable to produce sufficient amounts of Btk, the B-cell maturationand differentiation halts at the pre-B-cell stage of growth. B-cell maturation and differentiation beyond the pre-Bcellstage of growth is required for immunoglobulin production. Patients who lack antibody production suffer fromrecurrent infections almost exclusively due to extracellular pathogens that cause pyogenic infections: Haemophilusinfluenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, and S. aureus. Because cell-mediated immunity is not impaired,these patients are not particularly vulnerable to infections caused by viruses or intracellular pathogens.Selective IgA DeficiencyThe most common inherited form of immunoglobulin deficiency is selective IgA deficiency, affecting about one in800 people. Individuals with selective IgA deficiency produce normal levels of IgG and IgM, but are not able toproduce secretory IgA. IgA deficiency predisposes these individuals to lung and gastrointestinal infections for whichsecretory IgA is normally an important defense mechanism. Infections in the lungs and gastrointestinal tract caninvolve a variety of pathogens, including H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, S. aureus, Giardialamblia, or pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli.Severe Combined ImmunodeficiencyPatients who suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) have B-cell and T-cell defects that impairT-cell dependent antibody responses as well as cell-mediated immune responses. Patients with SCID also cannotdevelop immunological memory, so vaccines provide them no protection, and live attenuated vaccines (e.g., forvaricella-zoster, measles virus, rotavirus, poliovirus) can actually cause the infection they are intended to prevent.The most common form is X-linked SCID, which accounts for nearly 50% of all cases and occurs primarily in males.Patients with SCID are typically diagnosed within the first few months of life after developing severe, often lifethreatening,opportunistic infection by Candida spp., Pneumocystis jirovecii, or pathogenic strains of E. coli.Without treatment, babies with SCID do not typically survive infancy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplantmay successfully correct the defects in lymphocyte development that lead to the SCID phenotype, by replacing thedefective component. However, this treatment approach is not without risks, as demonstrated by the famous case ofDavid Vetter (1971–1984), better known as “Bubble Boy” (Figure 19.19). Vetter, a patient with SCID who lived ina protective plastic bubble to prevent exposure to opportunistic microbes, received a bone marrow transplant fromhis sister. Because of a latent Epstein-Barr virus infection in her bone marrow, however, he developed mononucleosisand died of Burkitt lymphoma at the age of 12 years.850 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 19.19 David Vetter, popularly known as “The Bubble Boy,” was born with SCID and lived most of his lifeisolated inside a plastic bubble. Here he is shown outside the bubble in a suit specially built for him by NASA. (credit:NASA Johnson Space Center)• What is the fundamental cause of a primary immunodeficiency?• Explain why patients with chronic granulomatous disease are especially susceptible to bacterial infections.• Explain why individuals with selective IgA deficiency are susceptible to respiratory and gastrointestinalinfections.Secondary ImmunodeficiencyA secondary immunodeficiency occurs as a result an acquired impairment of function of B cells, T cells, or both.Secondary immunodeficiencies can be caused by:• Systemic disorders such as diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, hepatitis, or HIV infection• Immunosuppressive treatments such as cytotoxic chemotherapy, bone marrow ablation before transplantation,or radiation therapy• Prolonged critical illness due to infection, surgery, or trauma in the very young, elderly, or hospitalizedpatientsUnlike primary immunodeficiencies, which have a genetic basis, secondary immunodeficiencies are often reversibleif the underlying cause is resolved. Patients with secondary immunodeficiencies develop an increased susceptibilityto an otherwise benign infection by opportunistic pathogens such as Candida spp., P. jirovecii, and Cryptosporidium.HIV infection and the associated acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are the best-known secondaryimmunodeficiencies. AIDS is characterized by profound CD4 T-cell lymphopenia (decrease in lymphocytes). Thedecrease in CD4 T cells is the result of various mechanisms, including HIV-induced pyroptosis (a type of apoptosisthat stimulates an inflammatory response), viral cytopathic effect, and cytotoxicity to HIV-infected cells.The most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency worldwide is severe malnutrition, which affects bothinnate and adaptive immunity. More research and information are needed for the more common causes of secondaryimmunodeficiency; however, the number of new discoveries in AIDS research far exceeds that of any other singleChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 851cause of secondary immunodeficiency. AIDS research has paid off extremely well in terms of discoveries andtreatments; increased research into the most common cause of immunodeficiency, malnutrition, would likely be asbeneficial.• What is the most common cause of secondary immunodeficiencies?• Explain why secondary immunodeficiencies can sometimes be reversed.An Immunocompromised HostBenjamin, a 50-year-old male patient who has been receiving chemotherapy to treat his chronic myelogenousleukemia (CML), a disease characterized by massive overproduction of nonfunctional, malignant myelocyticleukocytes that crowd out other, healthy leukocytes, is seen in the emergency department. He is complainingof a productive, wet cough, dyspnea, and fatigue. On examination, his pulse is 120 beats per minute (bpm)(normal range is 60–100 bpm) and weak, and his blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg (normal is 120/80 mm Hg).During auscultation, a distinct crackling can be heard in his lungs as he breathes, and his pulse-oximeter level(a measurement of blood-oxygen saturation) is 80% (normal is 95%–100%). He has a fever; his temperatureis 38.9 °C (102 °F). Sputum cultures and blood samples are obtained and sent to the lab, but Benjamin goesinto respiratory distress and dies before the results can be obtained.Benjamin’s death was a result of a combination of his immune system being compromised by his leukemia andhis chemotherapy treatment further weakening his ability to mount an immune response. CML (and leukemiain general) and corresponding chemotherapy cause a decrease in the number of leukocytes capable of normalfunction, leading to secondary immunodeficiency. This increases the risk for opportunistic bacterial, viral,protozoal, and fungal infections that could include Staphylococcus, enteroviruses, Pneumocystis, Giardia, orCandida. Benjamin’s symptoms were suggestive of bacterial pneumonia, but his leukemia and chemotherapylikely complicated and contributed to the severity of the pneumonia, resulting in his death. Because hisleukemia was overproducing certain white blood cells, and those overproduced white blood cells were largelynonfunctional or abnormal in their function, he did not have the proper immune system blood cells to help himfight off the infection.Table 19.8 summarizes primary and secondary immunodeficiencies, their effects on immune function, and typicaloutcomes.Primary and Secondary ImmunodeficienciesDisease Effect on Immune Function OutcomesChronicgranulomatousdiseaseImpaired killing of bacteriawithin the phagolysosome ofneutrophils andmacrophagesChronic infections andgranulomasPrimaryimmunodeficienciesSelective IgAdeficiencyInability to produce secretoryIgAPredisposition to lung andgastrointestinal infectionsTable 19.8Case in Point852 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Primary and Secondary ImmunodeficienciesDisease Effect on Immune Function OutcomesSevere combinedimmunodeficiencydisease (SCID)Deficient humoral and cellmediatedimmune responsesEarly development of severeand life-threateningopportunistic infectionsX-linkedagammaglobulinemiaFlawed differentiation of Bcells and absence of specificantibodiesRecurrent infections almostexclusively due to pathogensthat cause pyogenic infectionsImmunosuppressivetherapies (e.g.,chemotherapy,radiotherapy)Impaired humoral and/or cellmediatedimmune responsesOpportunistic infections, rarecancersMalnutrition Impaired humoral and/or cellmediatedimmune responsesOpportunistic infections, rarecancersSecondaryimmunodeficienciesViral infection (e.g.,HIV)Impaired cell-mediatedimmune responses due toCD4 T-cell lymphopeniaOpportunistic infections, rarecancersTable 19.819.5 Cancer Immunobiology and ImmunotherapyLearning Objectives• Explain how the adaptive specific immune response responds to tumors• Discuss the risks and benefits of tumor vaccinesCancer involves a loss of the ability of cells to control their cell cycle, the stages each eukaryotic cell goes throughas it grows and then divides. When this control is lost, the affected cells rapidly divide and often lose the ability todifferentiate into the cell type appropriate for their location in the body. In addition, they lose contact inhibition andcan start to grow on top of each other. This can result in formation of a tumor. It is important to make a distinctionhere: The term “cancer” is used to describe the diseases resulting from loss of cell-cycle regulation and subsequentcell proliferation. But the term “tumor” is more general. A “tumor” is an abnormal mass of cells, and a tumor can bebenign (not cancerous) or malignant (cancerous).Traditional cancer treatment uses radiation and/or chemotherapy to destroy cancer cells; however, these treatmentscan have unwanted side effects because they harm normal cells as well as cancer cells. Newer, promising therapiesattempt to enlist the patient’s immune system to target cancer cells specifically. It is known that the immune systemcan recognize and destroy cancerous cells, and some researchers and immunologists also believe, based on theresults of their experiments, that many cancers are eliminated by the body’s own defenses before they can becomea health problem. This idea is not universally accepted by researchers, however, and needs further investigation forverification.Cell-Mediated Response to TumorsCell-mediated immune responses can be directed against cancer cells, many of which do not have the normalcomplement of self-proteins, making them a target for elimination. Abnormal cancer cells may also present tumorantigens. These tumor antigens are not a part of the screening process used to eliminate lymphocytes duringdevelopment; thus, even though they are self-antigens, they can stimulate and drive adaptive immune responsesagainst abnormal cells.Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 853Presentation of tumor antigens can stimulate naïve helper T cells to become activated by cytokines such as IL-12 anddifferentiate into TH1 cells. TH1 cells release cytokines that can activate natural killer (NK) cells and enhance thekilling of activated cytotoxic T cells. Both NK cells and cytotoxic T cells can recognize and target cancer cells, andinduce apoptosis through the action of perforins and granzymes. In addition, activated cytotoxic T cells can bind tocell-surface proteins on abnormal cells and induce apoptosis by a second killing mechanism called the CD95 (Fas)cytotoxic pathway.Despite these mechanisms for removing cancerous cells from the body, cancer remains a common cause of death.Unfortunately, malignant tumors tend to actively suppress the immune response in various ways. In some cancers,the immune cells themselves are cancerous. In leukemia, lymphocytes that would normally facilitate the immuneresponse become abnormal. In other cancers, the cancerous cells can become resistant to induction of apoptosis. Thismay occur through the expression of membrane proteins that shut off cytotoxic T cells or that induce regulatory Tcells that can shut down immune responses.The mechanisms by which cancer cells alter immune responses are still not yet fully understood, and this is a veryactive area of research. As scientists’ understanding of adaptive immunity improves, cancer therapies that harness thebody’s immune defenses may someday be more successful in treating and eliminating cancer.• How do cancer cells suppress the immune system?• Describe how the immune system recognizes and destroys cancer cells.Cancer VaccinesThere are two types of cancer vaccines: preventive and therapeutic. Preventive vaccines are used to prevent cancerfrom occurring, whereas therapeutic vaccines are used to treat patients with cancer. Most preventive cancer vaccinestarget viral infections that are known to lead to cancer. These include vaccines against human papillomavirus (HPV)and hepatitis B, which help prevent cervical and liver cancer, respectively.Most therapeutic cancer vaccines are in the experimental stage. They exploit tumor-specific antigens to stimulate theimmune system to selectively attack cancer cells. Specifically, they aim to enhance TH1 function and interaction withcytotoxic T cells, which, in turn, results in more effective attack on abnormal tumor cells. In some cases, researchershave used genetic engineering to develop antitumor vaccines in an approach similar to that used for DNA vaccines(see Micro Connections: DNA vaccines). The vaccine contains a recombinant plasmid with genes for tumorantigens; theoretically, the tumor gene would not induce new cancer because it is not functional, but it could trick theimmune system into targeting the tumor gene product as a foreign invader.The first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine was sipuleucel-T (Provenge), approved in 2010 to treat certaincases of prostate cancer.[17] This unconventional vaccine is custom designed using the patient’s own cells. APCs areremoved from the patient and cultured with a tumor-specific molecule; the cells are then returned to the patient.This approach appears to enhance the patient’s immune response against the cancer cells. Another therapeutic cancervaccine (talimogene laherparepvec, also called T-VEC or Imlygic) was approved by the FDA in 2015 for treatment ofmelanoma, a form of skin cancer. This vaccine contains a virus that is injected into tumors, where it infects and lysesthe tumor cells. The virus also induces a response in lesions or tumors besides those into which the vaccine is injected,indicating that it is stimulating a more general (as opposed to local) antitumor immune response in the patient.17. National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. "Cancer Vaccines." http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/vaccines-fact-sheet#q8. Accessed on May 20, 2016.854 Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune SystemThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• Explain the difference between preventative and therapeutic cancer vaccines.• Describe at least two different approaches to developing therapeutic anti-cancer vaccines.Using Viruses to Cure CancerViruses typically destroy the cells they infect—a fact responsible for any number of human diseases. Butthe cell-killing powers of viruses may yet prove to be the cure for some types of cancer, which is generallytreated by attempting to rid the body of cancerous cells. Several clinical trials are studying the effects ofviruses targeted at cancer cells. Reolysin, a drug currently in testing phases, uses reoviruses (respiratoryenteric orphan viruses) that can infect and kill cells that have an activated Ras-signaling pathway, a commonmutation in cancerous cells. Viruses such as rubeola (the measles virus) can also be genetically engineeredto aggressively attack tumor cells. These modified viruses not only bind more specifically to receptorsoverexpressed on cancer cells, they also carry genes driven by promoters that are only turned on within cancercells. Herpesvirus and others have also been modified in this way.Summary19.1 Hypersensitivities• An allergy is an adaptive immune response, sometimes life-threatening, to an allergen.• Type I hypersensitivity requires sensitization of mast cells with IgE, involving an initial IgE antibodyresponse and IgE attachment to mast cells. On second exposure to an allergen, cross-linking of IgE moleculeson mast cells triggers degranulation and release of preformed and newly formed chemical mediators ofinflammation. Type I hypersensitivity may be localized and relatively minor (hives and hay fever) or systemwideand dangerous (systemic anaphylaxis).• Type II hypersensitivities result from antibodies binding to antigens on cells and initiating cytotoxicresponses. Examples include hemolytic transfusion reaction and hemolytic disease of the newborn.• Type III hypersensitivities result from formation and accumulation of immune complexes in tissues,stimulating damaging inflammatory responses.• Type IV hypersensitivities are not mediated by antibodies, but by helper T-cell activation of macrophages,eosinophils, and cytotoxic T cells.19.2 Autoimmune Disorders• Autoimmune diseases result from a breakdown in immunological tolerance. The actual induction event(s) forautoimmune states are largely unknown.• Some autoimmune diseases attack specific organs, whereas others are more systemic.• Organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease, Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, type Idiabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.• Systemic autoimmune diseases include multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, psoriasis, rheumatoidarthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.• Treatments for autoimmune diseases generally involve anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs.19.3 Organ Transplantation and Rejection• Grafts and transplants can be classified as autografts, isografts, allografts, or xenografts based on theMicro ConnectionsChapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System 855genetic differences between the donor’s and recipient’s tissues.• Genetic differences, especially among the MHC (HLA) genes, will dictate the likelihood that rejection of thetransplanted tissue will occur.• Transplant recipients usually require immunosuppressive therapy to avoid rejection, even with good geneticmatching. This can create additional problems when immune responses are needed to fight off infectiousagents and prevent cancer.• Graft-versus-host disease can occur in bone marrow transplants, as the mature T cells in the transplant itselfrecognize the recipient’s tissues as foreign.• Transplantation methods and technology have improved greatly in recent decades and may move into newareas with the use of stem cell technology to avoid the need for genetic matching of MHC molecules.19.4 Immunodeficiency• Primary immunodeficiencies are caused by genetic abnormalities; secondary immunodeficiencies areacquired through disease, diet, or environmental exposures• Primary immunodeficiencies may result from flaws in phagocyte killing of innate immunity, or impairment ofT cells and B cells.• Primary immunodeficiencies include chronic granulomatous disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia,selective IgA deficiency, and severe combined immunodeficiency disease.• Secondary immunodeficiencies result from environmentally induced defects in B cells and/or T cells.• Causes for secondary immunodeficiencies include malnutrition, viral infection, diabetes, prolonged infections,and chemical or radiation exposure.19.5 Cancer Immunobiology and Immunotherapy• Cancer results from a loss of control of the cell cycle, resulting in uncontrolled cell proliferation and a loss ofthe ability to differentiate.• Adaptive and innate immune responses are engaged by tumor antigens, self-molecules only found onabnormal cells. These adaptive responses stimulate helper T cells to activate cytotoxic T cells and NK cells ofinnate immunity that will seek and destroy cancer cells.• New anticancer therapies are in development that will exploit natural adaptive immunity anticancer responses.These include external stimulation of cytotoxic T cells and therapeutic vaccines that assist or enhance theimmune response.