Chapter 2How We See the Invisible WorldFigure 2.1 Different types of microscopy are used to visualize different structures. Brightfield microscopy (left)renders a darker image on a lighter background, producing a clear image of these Bacillus anthracis cells incerebrospinal fluid (the rod-shaped bacterial cells are surrounded by larger white blood cells). Darkfield microscopy(right) increases contrast, rendering a brighter image on a darker background, as demonstrated by this image of thebacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, which causes Lyme disease. (credit left: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention; credit right: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Chapter Outline2.1 The Properties of Light2.2 Peering Into the Invisible World2.3 Instruments of Microscopy2.4 Staining Microscopic SpecimensIntroductionWhen we look at a rainbow, its colors span the full spectrum of light that the human eye can detect and differentiate.Each hue represents a different frequency of visible light, processed by our eyes and brains and rendered as red,orange, yellow, green, or one of the many other familiar colors that have always been a part of the human experience.But only recently have humans developed an understanding of the properties of light that allow us to see images incolor.Over the past several centuries, we have learned to manipulate light to peer into previously invisible worlds—thosetoo small or too far away to be seen by the naked eye. Through a microscope, we can examine microbial cells andcolonies, using various techniques to manipulate color, size, and contrast in ways that help us identify species anddiagnose disease.Figure 2.1 illustrates how we can apply the properties of light to visualize and magnify images; but these stunningmicrographs are just two examples of the numerous types of images we are now able to produce with differentmicroscopic technologies. This chapter explores how various types of microscopes manipulate light in order toprovide a window into the world of microorganisms. By understanding how various kinds of microscopes work, wecan produce highly detailed images of microbes that can be useful for both research and clinical applications.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 432.1 The Properties of LightLearning Objectives• Identify and define the characteristics of electromagnetic radiation (EMR) used in microscopy• Explain how lenses are used in microscopy to manipulate visible and ultraviolet (UV) lightVisible light consists of electromagnetic waves that behave like other waves. Hence, many of the properties of lightthat are relevant to microscopy can be understood in terms of light’s behavior as a wave. An important property oflight waves is the wavelength, or the distance between one peak of a wave and the next peak. The height of each peak(or depth of each trough) is called the amplitude. In contrast, the frequency of the wave is the rate of vibration of thewave, or the number of wavelengths within a specified time period (Figure 2.2).Figure 2.2 (a) The amplitude is the height of a wave, whereas the wavelength is the distance between one peak andthe next. (b) These waves have different frequencies, or rates of vibration. The wave at the top has the lowestfrequency, since it has the fewest peaks per unit time. The wave at the bottom has the highest frequency.Interactions of LightLight waves interact with materials by being reflected, absorbed, or transmitted. Reflection occurs when a wavebounces off of a material. For example, a red piece of cloth may reflect red light to our eyes while absorbing othercolors of light. Absorbance occurs when a material captures the energy of a light wave. In the case of glow-in-thedarkplastics, the energy from light can be absorbed and then later re-emitted as another form of phosphorescence.Transmission occurs when a wave travels through a material, like light through glass (the process of transmission iscalled transmittance). When a material allows a large proportion of light to be transmitted, it may do so because itis thinner, or more transparent (having more transparency and less opacity). Figure 2.3 illustrates the differencePart 1Cindy, a 17-year-old counselor at a summer sports camp, scraped her knee playing basketball 2 weeks ago.At the time, she thought it was only a minor abrasion that would heal, like many others before it. Instead, thewound began to look like an insect bite and has continued to become increasingly painful and swollen.The camp nurse examines the lesion and observes a large amount of pus oozing from the surface. Concernedthat Cindy may have developed a potentially aggressive infection, she swabs the wound to collect a samplefrom the infection site. Then she cleans out the pus and dresses the wound, instructing Cindy to keep the areaclean and to come back the next day. When Cindy leaves, the nurse sends the sample to the closest medicallab to be analyzed under a microscope.• What are some things we can learn about these bacteria by looking at them under a microscope?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus44 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5between transparency and opacity.Figure 2.3 (a) A Petri dish is made of transparent plastic or glass, which allows transmission of a high proportion oflight. This transparency allows us to see through the sides of the dish to view the contents. (b) This slice of an ironmeteorite is opaque (i.e., it has opacity). Light is not transmitted through the material, making it impossible to see thepart of the hand covered by the object. (credit a: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit b: modification ofwork by “Waifer X”/Flickr)Light waves can also interact with each other by interference, creating complex patterns of motion. Dropping twopebbles into a puddle causes the waves on the puddle’s surface to interact, creating complex interference patterns.Light waves can interact in the same way.In addition to interfering with each other, light waves can also interact with small objects or openings by bending orscattering. This is called diffraction. Diffraction is larger when the object is smaller relative to the wavelength of thelight (the distance between two consecutive peaks of a light wave). Often, when waves diffract in different directionsaround an obstacle or opening, they will interfere with each other.• If a light wave has a long wavelength, is it likely to have a low or high frequency?• If an object is transparent, does it reflect, absorb, or transmit light?Lenses and RefractionIn the context of microscopy, refraction is perhaps the most important behavior exhibited by light waves. Refractionoccurs when light waves change direction as they enter a new medium (Figure 2.4). Different transparent materialstransmit light at different speeds; thus, light can change speed when passing from one material to another. This changein speed usually also causes a change in direction (refraction), with the degree of change dependent on the angle ofthe incoming light.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 45Figure 2.4 (a) Refraction occurs when light passes from one medium, such as air, to another, such as glass,changing the direction of the light rays. (b) As shown in this diagram, light rays passing from one medium to anothermay be either refracted or reflected.The extent to which a material slows transmission speed relative to empty space is called the refractive index of thatmaterial. Large differences between the refractive indices of two materials will result in a large amount of refractionwhen light passes from one material to the other. For example, light moves much more slowly through water thanthrough air, so light entering water from air can change direction greatly. We say that the water has a higher refractiveindex than air (Figure 2.5).Figure 2.5 This straight pole appears to bend at an angle as it enters the water. This optical illusion is due to thelarge difference between the refractive indices of air and water.When light crosses a boundary into a material with a higher refractive index, its direction turns to be closer toperpendicular to the boundary (i.e., more toward a normal to that boundary; see Figure 2.5). This is the principlebehind lenses.We can think of a lens as an object with a curved boundary (or a collection of prisms) that collects all ofthe light that strikes it and refracts it so that it all meets at a single point called the image point (focus). A convex lenscan be used to magnify because it can focus at closer range than the human eye, producing a larger image. Concavelenses and mirrors can also be used in microscopes to redirect the light path. Figure 2.6 shows the focal point (theimage point when light entering the lens is parallel) and the focal length (the distance to the focal point) for convexand concave lenses.46 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.6 (a) A lens is like a collection of prisms, such as the one shown here. (b) When light passes through aconvex lens, it is refracted toward a focal point on the other side of the lens. The focal length is the distance to thefocal point. (c) Light passing through a concave lens is refracted away from a focal point in front of the lens.The human eye contains a lens that enables us to see images. This lens focuses the light reflecting off of objects infront of the eye onto the surface of the retina, which is like a screen in the back of the eye. Artificial lenses placed infront of the eye (contact lenses, glasses, or microscopic lenses) focus light before it is focused (again) by the lens ofthe eye, manipulating the image that ends up on the retina (e.g., by making it appear larger).Images are commonly manipulated by controlling the distances between the object, the lens, and the screen, as well asthe curvature of the lens. For example, for a given amount of curvature, when an object is closer to the lens, the focalpoints are farther from the lens. As a result, it is often necessary to manipulate these distances to create a focusedimage on a screen. Similarly, more curvature creates image points closer to the lens and a larger image when theimage is in focus. This property is often described in terms of the focal distance, or distance to the focal point.• Explain how a lens focuses light at the image point.• Name some factors that affect the focal length of a lens.Electromagnetic Spectrum and ColorVisible light is just one form of electromagnetic radiation (EMR), a type of energy that is all around us. Otherforms of EMR include microwaves, X-rays, and radio waves, among others. The different types of EMR fall onthe electromagnetic spectrum, which is defined in terms of wavelength and frequency. The spectrum of visible lightoccupies a relatively small range of frequencies between infrared and ultraviolet light (Figure 2.7).Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 47Figure 2.7 The electromagnetic spectrum ranges from high-frequency gamma rays to low-frequency radio waves.Visible light is the relatively small range of electromagnetic frequencies that can be sensed by the human eye. On theelectromagnetic spectrum, visible light falls between ultraviolet and infrared light. (credit: modification of work byJohannes Ahlmann)Whereas wavelength represents the distance between adjacent peaks of a light wave, frequency, in a simplifieddefinition, represents the rate of oscillation. Waves with higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths and, therefore,have more oscillations per unit time than lower-frequency waves. Higher-frequency waves also contain more energythan lower-frequency waves. This energy is delivered as elementary particles called photons. Higher-frequency wavesdeliver more energetic photons than lower-frequency waves.Photons with different energies interact differently with the retina. In the spectrum of visible light, each colorcorresponds to a particular frequency and wavelength (Figure 2.7).The lowest frequency of visible light appears asthe color red, whereas the highest appears as the color violet. When the retina receives visible light of many differentfrequencies, we perceive this as white light. However, white light can be separated into its component colors usingrefraction. If we pass white light through a prism, different colors will be refracted in different directions, creatinga rainbow-like spectrum on a screen behind the prism. This separation of colors is called dispersion, and it occursbecause, for a given material, the refractive index is different for different frequencies of light.Certain materials can refract nonvisible forms of EMR and, in effect, transform them into visible light. Certainfluorescent dyes, for instance, absorb ultraviolet or blue light and then use the energy to emit photons of a differentcolor, giving off light rather than simply vibrating. This occurs because the energy absorption causes electrons tojump to higher energy states, after which they then almost immediately fall back down to their ground states, emittingspecific amounts of energy as photons. Not all of the energy is emitted in a given photon, so the emitted photons willbe of lower energy and, thus, of lower frequency than the absorbed ones. Thus, a dye such as Texas red may be excitedby blue light, but emit red light; or a dye such as fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) may absorb (invisible) highenergyultraviolet light and emit green light (Figure 2.8). In some materials, the photons may be emitted following adelay after absorption; in this case, the process is called phosphorescence. Glow-in-the-dark plastic works by usingphosphorescent material.48 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.8 The fluorescent dyes absorbed by these bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells emit brilliant colorswhen excited by ultraviolet light under a fluorescence microscope. Various cell structures absorb different dyes. Thenuclei are stained blue with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI); microtubles are marked green by an antibodybound to FITC; and actin filaments are labeled red with phalloidin bound to tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC). (credit:National Institutes of Health)• Which has a higher frequency: red light or green light?• Explain why dispersion occurs when white light passes through a prism.• Why do fluorescent dyes emit a different color of light than they absorb?Magnification, Resolution, and ContrastMicroscopes magnify images and use the properties of light to create useful images of small objects. Magnificationis defined as the ability of a lens to enlarge the image of an object when compared to the real object. For example, amagnification of 10⨯ means that the image appears 10 times the size of the object as viewed with the naked eye.Greater magnification typically improves our ability to see details of small objects, but magnification alone is notsufficient to make the most useful images. It is often useful to enhance the resolution of objects: the ability to tell thattwo separate points or objects are separate. A low-resolution image appears fuzzy, whereas a high-resolution imageappears sharp. Two factors affect resolution. The first is wavelength. Shorter wavelengths are able to resolve smallerobjects; thus, an electron microscope has a much higher resolution than a light microscope, since it uses an electronbeam with a very short wavelength, as opposed to the long-wavelength visible light used by a light microscope. Thesecond factor that affects resolution is numerical aperture, which is a measure of a lens’s ability to gather light. Thehigher the numerical aperture, the better the resolution.Read this article (https://www.openstax.org/l/22aperture) to learn more aboutfactors that can increase or decrease the numerical aperture of a lens.Even when a microscope has high resolution, it can be difficult to distinguish small structures in many specimensLink to LearningChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 49because microorganisms are relatively transparent. It is often necessary to increase contrast to detect differentstructures in a specimen. Various types of microscopes use different features of light or electrons to increasecontrast—visible differences between the parts of a specimen (see Instruments of Microscopy). Additionally,dyes that bind to some structures but not others can be used to improve the contrast between images of relativelytransparent objects (see Staining Microscopic Specimens).• Explain the difference between magnification and resolution.• Explain the difference between resolution and contrast.• Name two factors that affect resolution.2.2 Peering Into the Invisible WorldLearning Objectives• Describe historical developments and individual contributions that led to the invention and development of themicroscope• Compare and contrast the features of simple and compound microscopesSome of the fundamental characteristics and functions of microscopes can be understood in the context of the historyof their use. Italian scholar Girolamo Fracastoro is regarded as the first person to formally postulate that disease wasspread by tiny invisible seminaria, or “seeds of the contagion.” In his book De Contagione (1546), he proposed thatthese seeds could attach themselves to certain objects (which he called fomes [cloth]) that supported their transferfrom person to person. However, since the technology for seeing such tiny objects did not yet exist, the existence ofthe seminaria remained hypothetical for a little over a century—an invisible world waiting to be revealed.Early MicroscopesAntonie van Leeuwenhoek, sometimes hailed as “the Father of Microbiology,” is typically credited as the first personto have created microscopes powerful enough to view microbes (Figure 2.9). Born in the city of Delft in theDutch Republic, van Leeuwenhoek began his career selling fabrics. However, he later became interested in lensmaking (perhaps to look at threads) and his innovative techniques produced microscopes that allowed him to observemicroorganisms as no one had before. In 1674, he described his observations of single-celled organisms, whoseexistence was previously unknown, in a series of letters to the Royal Society of London. His report was initiallymet with skepticism, but his claims were soon verified and he became something of a celebrity in the scientificcommunity.50 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.9 (a) Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) is credited as being the first person to observe microbes,including bacteria, which he called “animalcules” and “wee little beasties.” (b) Even though van Leeuwenhoek’smicroscopes were simple microscopes (as seen in this replica), they were more powerful and provided betterresolution than the compound microscopes of his day. (c) Though more famous for developing the telescope, GalileoGalilei (1564–1642) was also one of the pioneers of microscopy. (credit b: modification of work by “WellcomeImages”/Wikimedia Commons)While van Leeuwenhoek is credited with the discovery of microorganisms, others before him had contributed to thedevelopment of the microscope. These included eyeglass makers in the Netherlands in the late 1500s, as well as theItalian astronomer Galileo Galilei, who used a compound microscope to examine insect parts (Figure 2.9). Whereasvan Leeuwenhoek used a simple microscope, in which light is passed through just one lens, Galileo’s compoundmicroscope was more sophisticated, passing light through two sets of lenses.Van Leeuwenhoek’s contemporary, the Englishman Robert Hooke (1635–1703), also made important contributions tomicroscopy, publishing in his book Micrographia (1665) many observations using compound microscopes. Viewinga thin sample of cork through his microscope, he was the first to observe the structures that we now know as cells(Figure 2.10). Hooke described these structures as resembling “Honey-comb,” and as “small Boxes or Bladders ofAir,” noting that each “Cavern, Bubble, or Cell” is distinct from the others (in Latin, “cell” literally means “smallroom”). They likely appeared to Hooke to be filled with air because the cork cells were dead, with only the rigid cellwalls providing the structure.Figure 2.10 Robert Hooke used his (a) compound microscope to view (b) cork cells. Both of these engravings arefrom his seminal work Micrographia, published in 1665.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 51• Explain the difference between simple and compound microscopes.• Compare and contrast the contributions of van Leeuwenhoek, Hooke, and Galileo to early microscopy.Who Invented the Microscope?While Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke generally receive much of the credit for early advances inmicroscopy, neither can claim to be the inventor of the microscope. Some argue that this designation shouldbelong to Hans and Zaccharias Janssen, Dutch spectacle-makers who may have invented the telescope,the simple microscope, and the compound microscope during the late 1500s or early 1600s (Figure 2.11).Unfortunately, little is known for sure about the Janssens, not even the exact dates of their births and deaths.The Janssens were secretive about their work and never published. It is also possible that the Janssens didnot invent anything at all; their neighbor, Hans Lippershey, also developed microscopes and telescopes duringthe same time frame, and he is often credited with inventing the telescope. The historical records from the timeare as fuzzy and imprecise as the images viewed through those early lenses, and any archived records havebeen lost over the centuries.By contrast, van Leeuwenhoek and Hooke can thank ample documentation of their work for their respectivelegacies. Like Janssen, van Leeuwenhoek began his work in obscurity, leaving behind few records. However,his friend, the prominent physician Reinier de Graaf, wrote a letter to the editor of the PhilosophicalTransactions of the Royal Society of London calling attention to van Leeuwenhoek’s powerful microscopes.From 1673 onward, van Leeuwenhoek began regularly submitting letters to the Royal Society detailing hisobservations. In 1674, his report describing single-celled organisms produced controversy in the scientificcommunity, but his observations were soon confirmed when the society sent a delegation to investigate hisfindings. He subsequently enjoyed considerable celebrity, at one point even entertaining a visit by the czar ofRussia.Similarly, Robert Hooke had his observations using microscopes published by the Royal Society in a bookcalled Micrographia in 1665. The book became a bestseller and greatly increased interest in microscopythroughout much of Europe.Micro Connections52 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.11 Zaccharias Janssen, along with his father Hans, may have invented the telescope, the simplemicroscope, and the compound microscope during the late 1500s or early 1600s. The historical evidence isinconclusive.2.3 Instruments of MicroscopyLearning Objectives• Identify and describe the parts of a brightfield microscope• Calculate total magnification for a compound microscope• Describe the distinguishing features and typical uses for various types of light microscopes, electronmicroscopes, and scanning probe microscopesThe early pioneers of microscopy opened a window into the invisible world of microorganisms. But microscopycontinued to advance in the centuries that followed. In 1830, Joseph Jackson Lister created an essentially modernlight microscope. The 20th century saw the development of microscopes that leveraged nonvisible light, suchas fluorescence microscopy, which uses an ultraviolet light source, and electron microscopy, which uses shortwavelengthelectron beams. These advances led to major improvements in magnification, resolution, and contrast.By comparison, the relatively rudimentary microscopes of van Leeuwenhoek and his contemporaries were far lesspowerful than even the most basic microscopes in use today. In this section, we will survey the broad range of modernmicroscopic technology and common applications for each type of microscope.Light MicroscopyMany types of microscopes fall under the category of light microscopes, which use light to visualize images.Examples of light microscopes include brightfield microscopes, darkfield microscopes, phase-contrast microscopes,differential interference contrast microscopes, fluorescence microscopes, confocal scanning laser microscopes, andtwo-photon microscopes. These various types of light microscopes can be used to complement each other indiagnostics and research.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 53Brightfield MicroscopesThe brightfield microscope, perhaps the most commonly used type of microscope, is a compound microscope withtwo or more lenses that produce a dark image on a bright background. Some brightfield microscopes are monocular(having a single eyepiece), though most newer brightfield microscopes are binocular (having two eyepieces), likethe one shown in Figure 2.12; in either case, each eyepiece contains a lens called an ocular lens. The ocularlenses typically magnify images 10 times (10⨯). At the other end of the body tube are a set of objective lenseson a rotating nosepiece. The magnification of these objective lenses typically ranges from 4⨯ to 100⨯, with themagnification for each lens designated on the metal casing of the lens. The ocular and objective lenses work togetherto create a magnified image. The total magnification is the product of the ocular magnification times the objectivemagnification:ocular magnificatio × objective magnificatioFor example, if a 40⨯ objective lens is selected and the ocular lens is 10⨯, the total magnification would be(40×)(10×) = 400×Figure 2.12 Components of a typical brightfield microscope.The item being viewed is called a specimen. The specimen is placed on a glass slide, which is then clipped into placeon the stage (a platform) of the microscope. Once the slide is secured, the specimen on the slide is positioned over thelight using the x-y mechanical stage knobs. These knobs move the slide on the surface of the stage, but do not raiseor lower the stage. Once the specimen is centered over the light, the stage position can be raised or lowered to focusthe image. The coarse focusing knob is used for large-scale movements with 4⨯ and 10⨯ objective lenses; the finefocusing knob is used for small-scale movements, especially with 40⨯ or 100⨯ objective lenses.When images are magnified, they become dimmer because there is less light per unit area of image. Highly magnifiedimages produced by microscopes, therefore, require intense lighting. In a brightfield microscope, this light is providedby an illuminator, which is typically a high-intensity bulb below the stage. Light from the illuminator passes upthrough condenser lens (located below the stage), which focuses all of the light rays on the specimen to maximizeillumination. The position of the condenser can be optimized using the attached condenser focus knob; once theoptimal distance is established, the condenser should not be moved to adjust the brightness. If less-than-maximal light54 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5levels are needed, the amount of light striking the specimen can be easily adjusted by opening or closing a diaphragmbetween the condenser and the specimen. In some cases, brightness can also be adjusted using the rheostat, a dimmerswitch that controls the intensity of the illuminator.A brightfield microscope creates an image by directing light from the illuminator at the specimen; this lightis differentially transmitted, absorbed, reflected, or refracted by different structures. Different colors can behavedifferently as they interact with chromophores (pigments that absorb and reflect particular wavelengths of light) inparts of the specimen. Often, chromophores are artificially added to the specimen using stains, which serve to increasecontrast and resolution. In general, structures in the specimen will appear darker, to various extents, than the brightbackground, creating maximally sharp images at magnifications up to about 1000⨯. Further magnification wouldcreate a larger image, but without increased resolution. This allows us to see objects as small as bacteria, which arevisible at about 400⨯ or so, but not smaller objects such as viruses.At very high magnifications, resolution may be compromised when light passes through the small amount of airbetween the specimen and the lens. This is due to the large difference between the refractive indices of air and glass;the air scatters the light rays before they can be focused by the lens. To solve this problem, a drop of oil can be used tofill the space between the specimen and an oil immersion lens, a special lens designed to be used with immersion oils.Since the oil has a refractive index very similar to that of glass, it increases the maximum angle at which light leavingthe specimen can strike the lens. This increases the light collected and, thus, the resolution of the image (Figure2.13). A variety of oils can be used for different types of light.Figure 2.13 (a) Oil immersion lenses like this one are used to improve resolution. (b) Because immersion oil andglass have very similar refractive indices, there is a minimal amount of refraction before the light reaches the lens.Without immersion oil, light scatters as it passes through the air above the slide, degrading the resolution of theimage.Microscope Maintenance: Best PracticesEven a very powerful microscope cannot deliver high-resolution images if it is not properly cleaned andmaintained. Since lenses are carefully designed and manufactured to refract light with a high degree ofprecision, even a slightly dirty or scratched lens will refract light in unintended ways, degrading the image ofthe specimen. In addition, microscopes are rather delicate instruments, and great care must be taken to avoiddamaging parts and surfaces. Among other things, proper care of a microscope includes the following:Micro ConnectionsChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 55• cleaning the lenses with lens paper• not allowing lenses to contact the slide (e.g., by rapidly changing the focus)• protecting the bulb (if there is one) from breakage• not pushing an objective into a slide• not using the coarse focusing knob when using the 40⨯ or greater objective lenses• only using immersion oil with a specialized oil objective, usually the 100⨯ objective• cleaning oil from immersion lenses after using the microscope• cleaning any oil accidentally transferred from other lenses• covering the microscope or placing it in a cabinet when not in useVisit the online resources linked below for simulations and demonstrationsinvolving the use of microscopes. Keep in mind that execution of specifictechniques and procedures can vary depending on the specific instrument youare using. Thus, it is important to learn and practice with an actual microscope ina laboratory setting under expert supervision.• University of Delaware’s Virtual Microscope (https://www.openstax.org/l/22virtualsim)• St. John’s University Microscope Tutorials (https://www.openstax.org/l/22microtut)Darkfield MicroscopyA darkfield microscope is a brightfield microscope that has a small but significant modification to the condenser. Asmall, opaque disk (about 1 cm in diameter) is placed between the illuminator and the condenser lens. This opaquelight stop, as the disk is called, blocks most of the light from the illuminator as it passes through the condenser onits way to the objective lens, producing a hollow cone of light that is focused on the specimen. The only light thatreaches the objective is light that has been refracted or reflected by structures in the specimen. The resulting imagetypically shows bright objects on a dark background (Figure 2.14).Link to Learning56 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.14 An opaque light stop inserted into a brightfield microscope is used to produce a darkfield image. Thelight stop blocks light traveling directly from the illuminator to the objective lens, allowing only light reflected orrefracted off the specimen to reach the eye.Darkfield microscopy can often create high-contrast, high-resolution images of specimens without the use of stains,which is particularly useful for viewing live specimens that might be killed or otherwise compromised by the stains.For example, thin spirochetes like Treponema pallidum, the causative agent of syphilis, can be best viewed using adarkfield microscope (Figure 2.15).Figure 2.15 Use of a darkfield microscope allows us to view living, unstained samples of the spirochete Treponemapallidum. Similar to a photographic negative, the spirochetes appear bright against a dark background. (credit:Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Identify the key differences between brightfield and darkfield microscopy.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 57Part 2Wound infections like Cindy’s can be caused by many different types of bacteria, some of which can spreadrapidly with serious complications. Identifying the specific cause is very important to select a medication thatcan kill or stop the growth of the bacteria.After calling a local doctor about Cindy’s case, the camp nurse sends the sample from the wound to the closestmedical laboratory. Unfortunately, since the camp is in a remote area, the nearest lab is small and poorlyequipped. A more modern lab would likely use other methods to culture, grow, and identify the bacteria, butin this case, the technician decides to make a wet mount from the specimen and view it under a brightfieldmicroscope. In a wet mount, a small drop of water is added to the slide, and a cover slip is placed over thespecimen to keep it in place before it is positioned under the objective lens.Under the brightfield microscope, the technician can barely see the bacteria cells because they are nearlytransparent against the bright background. To increase contrast, the technician inserts an opaque light stopabove the illuminator. The resulting darkfield image clearly shows that the bacteria cells are spherical andgrouped in clusters, like grapes.• Why is it important to identify the shape and growth patterns of cells in a specimen?• What other types of microscopy could be used effectively to view this specimen?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Phase-Contrast MicroscopesPhase-contrast microscopes use refraction and interference caused by structures in a specimen to create highcontrast,high-resolution images without staining. It is the oldest and simplest type of microscope that creates animage by altering the wavelengths of light rays passing through the specimen. To create altered wavelength paths,an annular stop is used in the condenser. The annular stop produces a hollow cone of light that is focused on thespecimen before reaching the objective lens. The objective contains a phase plate containing a phase ring. As a result,light traveling directly from the illuminator passes through the phase ring while light refracted or reflected by thespecimen passes through the plate. This causes waves traveling through the ring to be about one-half of a wavelengthout of phase with those passing through the plate. Because waves have peaks and troughs, they can add together (if inphase together) or cancel each other out (if out of phase). When the wavelengths are out of phase, wave troughs willcancel out wave peaks, which is called destructive interference. Structures that refract light then appear dark against abright background of only unrefracted light. More generally, structures that differ in features such as refractive indexwill differ in levels of darkness (Figure 2.16).Clinical Focus58 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.16 This diagram of a phase-contrast microscope illustrates phase differences between light passingthrough the object and background. These differences are produced by passing the rays through different parts of aphase plate. The light rays are superimposed in the image plane, producing contrast due to their interference.Because it increases contrast without requiring stains, phase-contrast microscopy is often used to observe livespecimens. Certain structures, such as organelles in eukaryotic cells and endospores in prokaryotic cells, areespecially well visualized with phase-contrast microscopy (Figure 2.17).Figure 2.17 This figure compares a brightfield image (left) with a phase-contrast image (right) of the same unstainedsimple squamous epithelial cells. The cells are in the center and bottom right of each photograph (the irregular itemabove the cells is acellular debris). Notice that the unstained cells in the brightfield image are almost invisible againstthe background, whereas the cells in the phase-contrast image appear to glow against the background, revealing farmore detail.Differential Interference Contrast MicroscopesDifferential interference contrast (DIC) microscopes (also known as Nomarski optics) are similar to phase-contrastChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 59microscopes in that they use interference patterns to enhance contrast between different features of a specimen. Ina DIC microscope, two beams of light are created in which the direction of wave movement (polarization) differs.Once the beams pass through either the specimen or specimen-free space, they are recombined and effects of thespecimens cause differences in the interference patterns generated by the combining of the beams. This results inhigh-contrast images of living organisms with a three-dimensional appearance. These microscopes are especiallyuseful in distinguishing structures within live, unstained specimens. (Figure 2.18)Figure 2.18 A DIC image of Fonsecaea pedrosoi grown on modified Leonian’s agar. This fungus causeschromoblastomycosis, a chronic skin infection common in tropical and subtropical climates.• What are some advantages of phase-contrast and DIC microscopy?Fluorescence MicroscopesA fluorescence microscope uses fluorescent chromophores called fluorochromes, which are capable of absorbingenergy from a light source and then emitting this energy as visible light. Fluorochromes include naturally fluorescentsubstances (such as chlorophylls) as well as fluorescent stains that are added to the specimen to create contrast. Dyessuch as Texas red and FITC are examples of fluorochromes. Other examples include the nucleic acid dyes 4’,6’-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and acridine orange.The microscope transmits an excitation light, generally a form of EMR with a short wavelength, such as ultravioletor blue light, toward the specimen; the chromophores absorb the excitation light and emit visible light with longerwavelengths. The excitation light is then filtered out (in part because ultraviolet light is harmful to the eyes) so thatonly visible light passes through the ocular lens. This produces an image of the specimen in bright colors against adark background.Fluorescence microscopes are especially useful in clinical microbiology. They can be used to identify pathogens, tofind particular species within an environment, or to find the locations of particular molecules and structures withina cell. Approaches have also been developed to distinguish living from dead cells using fluorescence microscopybased upon whether they take up particular fluorochromes. Sometimes, multiple fluorochromes are used on the samespecimen to show different structures or features.One of the most important applications of fluorescence microscopy is a technique called immunofluorescence, whichis used to identify certain disease-causing microbes by observing whether antibodies bind to them. (Antibodies areprotein molecules produced by the immune system that attach to specific pathogens to kill or inhibit them.) There aretwo approaches to this technique: direct immunofluorescence assay (DFA) and indirect immunofluorescence assay(IFA). In DFA, specific antibodies (e.g., those that the target the rabies virus) are stained with a fluorochrome. If the60 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5specimen contains the targeted pathogen, one can observe the antibodies binding to the pathogen under the fluorescentmicroscope. This is called a primary antibody stain because the stained antibodies attach directly to the pathogen.In IFA, secondary antibodies are stained with a fluorochrome rather than primary antibodies. Secondary antibodiesdo not attach directly to the pathogen, but they do bind to primary antibodies. When the unstained primary antibodiesbind to the pathogen, the fluorescent secondary antibodies can be observed binding to the primary antibodies. Thus,the secondary antibodies are attached indirectly to the pathogen. Since multiple secondary antibodies can often attachto a primary antibody, IFA increases the number of fluorescent antibodies attached to the specimen, making it easiervisualize features in the specimen (Figure 2.19).Figure 2.19 (a) A direct immunofluorescent stain is used to visualize Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the bacterium thatcauses gonorrhea. (b) An indirect immunofluorescent stain is used to visualize larvae of Schistosoma mansoni, aparasitic worm that causes schistosomiasis, an intestinal disease common in the tropics. (c) In directimmunofluorescence, the stain is absorbed by a primary antibody, which binds to the antigen. In indirectimmunofluorescence, the stain is absorbed by a secondary antibody, which binds to a primary antibody, which, inturn, binds to the antigen. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Why must fluorochromes be used to examine a specimen under a fluorescence microscope?Confocal MicroscopesWhereas other forms of light microscopy create an image that is maximally focused at a single distance from theobserver (the depth, or z-plane), a confocal microscope uses a laser to scan multiple z-planes successively. Thisproduces numerous two-dimensional, high-resolution images at various depths, which can be constructed into a threedimensionalimage by a computer. As with fluorescence microscopes, fluorescent stains are generally used to increasecontrast and resolution. Image clarity is further enhanced by a narrow aperture that eliminates any light that is notfrom the z-plane. Confocal microscopes are thus very useful for examining thick specimens such as biofilms, whichChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 61can be examined alive and unfixed (Figure 2.20).Figure 2.20 Confocal microscopy can be used to visualize structures such as this roof-dwelling cyanobacteriumbiofilm. (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Explore a rotating three-dimensional view (https://www.openstax.org/l/22biofilm3d) of a biofilm as observed under a confocal microscope. Afternavigating to the webpage, click the “play” button to launch the video.Two-Photon MicroscopesWhile the original fluorescent and confocal microscopes allowed better visualization of unique features in specimens,there were still problems that prevented optimum visualization. The effective sensitivity of fluorescence microscopywhen viewing thick specimens was generally limited by out-of-focus flare, which resulted in poor resolution. Thislimitation was greatly reduced in the confocal microscope through the use of a confocal pinhole to reject out-of-focusbackground fluorescence with thin (<1 μm), unblurred optical sections. However, even the confocal microscopeslacked the resolution needed for viewing thick tissue samples. These problems were resolved with the developmentof the two-photon microscope, which uses a scanning technique, fluorochromes, and long-wavelength light (such asinfrared) to visualize specimens. The low energy associated with the long-wavelength light means that two photonsmust strike a location at the same time to excite the fluorochrome. The low energy of the excitation light is lessdamaging to cells, and the long wavelength of the excitation light more easily penetrates deep into thick specimens.This makes the two-photon microscope useful for examining living cells within intact tissues—brain slices, embryos,whole organs, and even entire animals.Currently, use of two-photon microscopes is limited to advanced clinical and research laboratories because of the highcosts of the instruments. A single two-photon microscope typically costs between $300,000 and $500,000, and thelasers used to excite the dyes used on specimens are also very expensive. However, as technology improves, twophotonmicroscopes may become more readily available in clinical settings.• What types of specimens are best examined using confocal or two-photon microscopy?Link to Learning62 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Electron MicroscopyThe maximum theoretical resolution of images created by light microscopes is ultimately limited by the wavelengthsof visible light. Most light microscopes can only magnify 1000⨯, and a few can magnify up to 1500⨯, but this doesnot begin to approach the magnifying power of an electron microscope (EM), which uses short-wavelength electronbeams rather than light to increase magnification and resolution.Electrons, like electromagnetic radiation, can behave as waves, but with wavelengths of 0.005 nm, they can producemuch better resolution than visible light. An EM can produce a sharp image that is magnified up to 100,000⨯. Thus,EMs can resolve subcellular structures as well as some molecular structures (e.g., single strands of DNA); however,electron microscopy cannot be used on living material because of the methods needed to prepare the specimens.There are two basic types of EM: the transmission electron microscope (TEM) and the scanning electronmicroscope (SEM) (Figure 2.21). The TEM is somewhat analogous to the brightfield light microscope in terms ofthe way it functions. However, it uses an electron beam from above the specimen that is focused using a magnetic lens(rather than a glass lens) and projected through the specimen onto a detector. Electrons pass through the specimen,and then the detector captures the image (Figure 2.22).Figure 2.21 A transmission electron microscope (TEM).Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 63Figure 2.22 Electron microscopes use magnets to focus electron beams similarly to the way that light microscopesuse lenses to focus light.For electrons to pass through the specimen in a TEM, the specimen must be extremely thin (20–100 nm thick). Theimage is produced because of varying opacity in various parts of the specimen. This opacity can be enhanced bystaining the specimen with materials such as heavy metals, which are electron dense. TEM requires that the beam andspecimen be in a vacuum and that the specimen be very thin and dehydrated. The specific steps needed to prepare aspecimen for observation under an EM are discussed in detail in the next section.SEMs form images of surfaces of specimens, usually from electrons that are knocked off of specimens by a beamof electrons. This can create highly detailed images with a three-dimensional appearance that are displayed on amonitor (Figure 2.23). Typically, specimens are dried and prepared with fixatives that reduce artifacts, such asshriveling, that can be produced by drying, before being sputter-coated with a thin layer of metal such as gold.Whereas transmission electron microscopy requires very thin sections and allows one to see internal structures suchas organelles and the interior of membranes, scanning electron microscopy can be used to view the surfaces of largerobjects (such as a pollen grain) as well as the surfaces of very small samples (Figure 2.24). Some EMs can magnifyan image up to 2,000,000⨯.[1]1. “JEM-ARM200F Transmission Electron Microscope,” JEOL USA Inc, http://www.jeolusa.com/PRODUCTS/TransmissionElectronMicroscopes%28TEM%29/200kV/JEM-ARM200F/tabid/663/Default.aspx#195028-specifications. Accessed 8/28/2015.64 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.23 These schematic illustrations compare the components of transmission electron microscopes andscanning electron microscopes.Figure 2.24 (a) This TEM image of cells in a biofilm shows well-defined internal structures of the cells because ofvarying levels of opacity in the specimen. (b) This color-enhanced SEM image of the bacterium Staphylococcusaureus illustrates the ability of scanning electron microscopy to render three-dimensional images of the surfacestructure of cells. (credit a: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit b: modification of workby Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What are some advantages and disadvantages of electron microscopy, as opposed to light microscopy, forexamining microbiological specimens?• What kinds of specimens are best examined using TEM? SEM?Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 65Using Microscopy to Study BiofilmsA biofilm is a complex community of one or more microorganism species, typically forming as a slimy coating attachedto a surface because of the production of an extrapolymeric substance (EPS) that attaches to a surface or at theinterface between surfaces (e.g., between air and water). In nature, biofilms are abundant and frequently occupycomplex niches within ecosystems (Figure 2.25). In medicine, biofilms can coat medical devices and exist within thebody. Because they possess unique characteristics, such as increased resistance against the immune system and toantimicrobial drugs, biofilms are of particular interest to microbiologists and clinicians alike.Because biofilms are thick, they cannot be observed very well using light microscopy; slicing a biofilm to createa thinner specimen might kill or disturb the microbial community. Confocal microscopy provides clearer imagesof biofilms because it can focus on one z-plane at a time and produce a three-dimensional image of a thickspecimen. Fluorescent dyes can be helpful in identifying cells within the matrix. Additionally, techniques such asimmunofluorescence and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), in which fluorescent probes are used to bind toDNA, can be used.Electron microscopy can be used to observe biofilms, but only after dehydrating the specimen, which producesundesirable artifacts and distorts the specimen. In addition to these approaches, it is possible to follow water currentsthrough the shapes (such as cones and mushrooms) of biofilms, using video of the movement of fluorescently coatedbeads (Figure 2.26).Figure 2.25 A biofilm forms when planktonic (free-floating) bacteria of one or more species adhere to a surface,produce slime, and form a colony. (credit: Public Library of Science)Micro Connections66 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.26 In this image, multiple species of bacteria grow in a biofilm on stainless steel (stained with DAPI forepifluorescence miscroscopy). (credit: Ricardo Murga, Rodney Donlan)Scanning Probe MicroscopyA scanning probe microscope does not use light or electrons, but rather very sharp probes that are passed over thesurface of the specimen and interact with it directly. This produces information that can be assembled into images withmagnifications up to 100,000,000⨯. Such large magnifications can be used to observe individual atoms on surfaces.To date, these techniques have been used primarily for research rather than for diagnostics.There are two types of scanning probe microscope: the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and the atomic forcemicroscope (AFM). An STM uses a probe that is passed just above the specimen as a constant voltage bias createsthe potential for an electric current between the probe and the specimen. This current occurs via quantum tunnelingof electrons between the probe and the specimen, and the intensity of the current is dependent upon the distancebetween the probe and the specimen. The probe is moved horizontally above the surface and the intensity of thecurrent is measured. Scanning tunneling microscopy can effectively map the structure of surfaces at a resolution atwhich individual atoms can be detected.Similar to an STM, AFMs have a thin probe that is passed just above the specimen. However, rather than measuringvariations in the current at a constant height above the specimen, an AFM establishes a constant current and measuresvariations in the height of the probe tip as it passes over the specimen. As the probe tip is passed over the specimen,forces between the atoms (van der Waals forces, capillary forces, chemical bonding, electrostatic forces, and others)cause it to move up and down. Deflection of the probe tip is determined and measured using Hooke’s law of elasticity,and this information is used to construct images of the surface of the specimen with resolution at the atomic level(Figure 2.27).Figure 2.28, Figure 2.29, and Figure 2.30 summarize the microscopy techniques for light microscopes, electronmicroscopes, and scanning probe microscopes, respectively.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 67Figure 2.27 STMs and AFMs allow us to view images at the atomic level. (a) This STM image of a pure gold surfaceshows individual atoms of gold arranged in columns. (b) This AFM image shows long, strand-like molecules ofnanocellulose, a laboratory-created substance derived from plant fibers. (credit a: modification of work by“Erwinrossen”/Wikimedia Commons)• Which has higher magnification, a light microscope or a scanning probe microscope?• Name one advantage and one limitation of scanning probe microscopy.68 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.28 (credit “Brightfield”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit “Darkfield”:modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit “Phase contrast”: modification of work by AmericanSociety for Microbiology; credit “DIC”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit“Fluorescence”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit “Confocal”: modification of work byAmerican Society for Microbiology; credit “Two-photon”: modification of work by Alberto Diaspro, Paolo Bianchini,Giuseppe Vicidomini, Mario Faretta, Paola Ramoino, Cesare Usai)Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 69Figure 2.29 (credit “TEM”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit “SEM”: modification ofwork by American Society for Microbiology)Figure 2.3070 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.52.4 Staining Microscopic SpecimensLearning Objectives• Differentiate between simple and differential stains• Describe the unique features of commonly used stains• Explain the procedures and name clinical applications for Gram, endospore, acid-fast, negative capsule, andflagella stainingIn their natural state, most of the cells and microorganisms that we observe under the microscope lack color andcontrast. This makes it difficult, if not impossible, to detect important cellular structures and their distinguishingcharacteristics without artificially treating specimens. We have already alluded to certain techniques involving stainsand fluorescent dyes, and in this section we will discuss specific techniques for sample preparation in greater detail.Indeed, numerous methods have been developed to identify specific microbes, cellular structures, DNA sequences,or indicators of infection in tissue samples, under the microscope. Here, we will focus on the most clinically relevanttechniques.Preparing Specimens for Light MicroscopyIn clinical settings, light microscopes are the most commonly used microscopes. There are two basic types ofpreparation used to view specimens with a light microscope: wet mounts and fixed specimens.The simplest type of preparation is the wet mount, in which the specimen is placed on the slide in a drop of liquid.Some specimens, such as a drop of urine, are already in a liquid form and can be deposited on the slide using adropper. Solid specimens, such as a skin scraping, can be placed on the slide before adding a drop of liquid to preparethe wet mount. Sometimes the liquid used is simply water, but often stains are added to enhance contrast. Once theliquid has been added to the slide, a coverslip is placed on top and the specimen is ready for examination under themicroscope.The second method of preparing specimens for light microscopy is fixation. The “fixing” of a sample refers to theprocess of attaching cells to a slide. Fixation is often achieved either by heating (heat fixing) or chemically treatingthe specimen. In addition to attaching the specimen to the slide, fixation also kills microorganisms in the specimen,stopping their movement and metabolism while preserving the integrity of their cellular components for observation.To heat-fix a sample, a thin layer of the specimen is spread on the slide (called a smear), and the slide is thenbriefly heated over a heat source (Figure 2.31). Chemical fixatives are often preferable to heat for tissue specimens.Chemical agents such as acetic acid, ethanol, methanol, formaldehyde (formalin), and glutaraldehyde can denatureproteins, stop biochemical reactions, and stabilize cell structures in tissue samples (Figure 2.31).Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 71Figure 2.31 (a) A specimen can be heat-fixed by using a slide warmer like this one. (b) Another method for heatfixinga specimen is to hold a slide with a smear over a microincinerator. (c) This tissue sample is being fixed in asolution of formalin (also known as formaldehyde). Chemical fixation kills microorganisms in the specimen, stoppingdegradation of the tissues and preserving their structure so that they can be examined later under the microscope.(credit a: modification of work by Nina Parker; credit b: modification of work by Nina Parker; credit c: modification ofwork by “University of Bristol”/YouTube)In addition to fixation, staining is almost always applied to color certain features of a specimen before examining itunder a light microscope. Stains, or dyes, contain salts made up of a positive ion and a negative ion. Depending onthe type of dye, the positive or the negative ion may be the chromophore (the colored ion); the other, uncolored ionis called the counterion. If the chromophore is the positively charged ion, the stain is classified as a basic dye; if thenegative ion is the chromophore, the stain is considered an acidic dye.Dyes are selected for staining based on the chemical properties of the dye and the specimen being observed, whichdetermine how the dye will interact with the specimen. In most cases, it is preferable to use a positive stain, a dyethat will be absorbed by the cells or organisms being observed, adding color to objects of interest to make them standout against the background. However, there are scenarios in which it is advantageous to use a negative stain, which isabsorbed by the background but not by the cells or organisms in the specimen. Negative staining produces an outlineor silhouette of the organisms against a colorful background (Figure 2.32).Figure 2.32 (a) These Bacillus anthracis cells have absorbed crystal violet, a basic positive stain. (b) This specimenof Spinoloricus, a microscopic marine organism, has been stained with rose bengal, a positive acidic stain. (c) TheseB. megaterium appear to be white because they have not absorbed the negative red stain applied to the slide. (credita: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by RobertoDanovaro, Antonio Pusceddu, Cristina Gambi, Iben Heiner, Reinhardt Mobjerg Kristensen; credit c: modification ofwork by Anh-Hue Tu)Because cells typically have negatively charged cell walls, the positive chromophores in basic dyes tend to stick tothe cell walls, making them positive stains. Thus, commonly used basic dyes such as basic fuchsin, crystal violet,72 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5malachite green, methylene blue, and safranin typically serve as positive stains. On the other hand, the negativelycharged chromophores in acidic dyes are repelled by negatively charged cell walls, making them negative stains.Commonly used acidic dyes include acid fuchsin, eosin, and rose bengal. Figure 2.40 provides more detail.Some staining techniques involve the application of only one dye to the sample; others require more than one dye. Insimple staining, a single dye is used to emphasize particular structures in the specimen. A simple stain will generallymake all of the organisms in a sample appear to be the same color, even if the sample contains more than onetype of organism. In contrast, differential staining distinguishes organisms based on their interactions with multiplestains. In other words, two organisms in a differentially stained sample may appear to be different colors. Differentialstaining techniques commonly used in clinical settings include Gram staining, acid-fast staining, endospore staining,flagella staining, and capsule staining. Figure 2.41 provides more detail on these differential staining techniques.• Explain why it is important to fix a specimen before viewing it under a light microscope.• What types of specimens should be chemically fixed as opposed to heat-fixed?• Why might an acidic dye react differently with a given specimen than a basic dye?• Explain the difference between a positive stain and a negative stain.• Explain the difference between simple and differential staining.Gram StainingThe Gram stain procedure is a differential staining procedure that involves multiple steps. It was developed byDanish microbiologist Hans Christian Gram in 1884 as an effective method to distinguish between bacteria withdifferent types of cell walls, and even today it remains one of the most frequently used staining techniques. The stepsof the Gram stain procedure are listed below and illustrated in Figure 2.33.1. First, crystal violet, a primary stain, is applied to a heat-fixed smear, giving all of the cells a purple color.2. Next, Gram’s iodine, a mordant, is added. A mordant is a substance used to set or stabilize stains or dyes; inthis case, Gram’s iodine acts like a trapping agent that complexes with the crystal violet, making the crystalviolet–iodine complex clump and stay contained in thick layers of peptidoglycan in the cell walls.3. Next, a decolorizing agent is added, usually ethanol or an acetone/ethanol solution. Cells that have thickpeptidoglycan layers in their cell walls are much less affected by the decolorizing agent; they generally retainthe crystal violet dye and remain purple. However, the decolorizing agent more easily washes the dye out ofcells with thinner peptidoglycan layers, making them again colorless.4. Finally, a secondary counterstain, usually safranin, is added. This stains the decolorized cells pink and is lessnoticeable in the cells that still contain the crystal violet dye.Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 73Figure 2.33 Gram-staining is a differential staining technique that uses a primary stain and a secondary counterstainto distinguish between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria.The purple, crystal-violet stained cells are referred to as gram-positive cells, while the red, safranin-dyed cells aregram-negative (Figure 2.34). However, there are several important considerations in interpreting the results ofa Gram stain. First, older bacterial cells may have damage to their cell walls that causes them to appear gramnegativeeven if the species is gram-positive. Thus, it is best to use fresh bacterial cultures for Gram staining. Second,errors such as leaving on decolorizer too long can affect the results. In some cases, most cells will appear grampositivewhile a few appear gram-negative (as in Figure 2.34). This suggests damage to the individual cells or thatdecolorizer was left on for too long; the cells should still be classified as gram-positive if they are all the same speciesrather than a mixed culture.Besides their differing interactions with dyes and decolorizing agents, the chemical differences between grampositiveand gram-negative cells have other implications with clinical relevance. For example, Gram staining can helpclinicians classify bacterial pathogens in a sample into categories associated with specific properties. Gram-negativebacteria tend to be more resistant to certain antibiotics than gram-positive bacteria. We will discuss this and otherapplications of Gram staining in more detail in later chapters.74 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.34 In this specimen, the gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus retains crystal violet dye evenafter the decolorizing agent is added. Gram-negative Escherichia coli, the most common Gram stain quality-controlbacterium, is decolorized, and is only visible after the addition of the pink counterstain safranin. (credit: modification ofwork by Nina Parker)• Explain the role of Gram’s iodine in the Gram stain procedure.• Explain the role of alcohol in the Gram stain procedure.• What color are gram-positive and gram-negative cells, respectively, after the Gram stain procedure?Part 3Viewing Cindy’s specimen under the darkfield microscope has provided the technician with some importantclues about the identity of the microbe causing her infection. However, more information is needed to makea conclusive diagnosis. The technician decides to make a Gram stain of the specimen. This technique iscommonly used as an early step in identifying pathogenic bacteria. After completing the Gram stain procedure,the technician views the slide under the brightfield microscope and sees purple, grape-like clusters of sphericalcells (Figure 2.35).• Are these bacteria gram-positive or gram-negative?• What does this reveal about their cell walls?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Clinical FocusChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 75Figure 2.35 (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Acid-Fast StainsAcid-fast staining is another commonly used, differential staining technique that can be an important diagnostic tool.An acid-fast stain is able to differentiate two types of gram-positive cells: those that have waxy mycolic acids in theircell walls, and those that do not. Two different methods for acid-fast staining are the Ziehl-Neelsen technique and theKinyoun technique. Both use carbolfuchsin as the primary stain. The waxy, acid-fast cells retain the carbolfuchsineven after a decolorizing agent (an acid-alcohol solution) is applied. A secondary counterstain, methylene blue, isthen applied, which renders non–acid-fast cells blue.The fundamental difference between the two carbolfuchsin-based methods is whether heat is used during the primarystaining process. The Ziehl-Neelsen method uses heat to infuse the carbolfuchsin into the acid-fast cells, whereasthe Kinyoun method does not use heat. Both techniques are important diagnostic tools because a number of specificdiseases are caused by acid-fast bacteria (AFB). If AFB are present in a tissue sample, their red or pink color can beseen clearly against the blue background of the surrounding tissue cells (Figure 2.36).• Why are acid-fast stains useful?Using Microscopy to Diagnose TuberculosisMycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterium that causes tuberculosis, can be detected in specimens based onthe presence of acid-fast bacilli. Often, a smear is prepared from a sample of the patient’s sputum and thenstained using the Ziehl-Neelsen technique (Figure 2.36). If acid-fast bacteria are confirmed, they are generallycultured to make a positive identification. Variations of this approach can be used as a first step in determiningwhether M. tuberculosis or other acid-fast bacteria are present, though samples from elsewhere in the body(such as urine) may contain other Mycobacterium species.An alternative approach for determining the presence of M. tuberculosis is immunofluorescence. In thistechnique, fluorochrome-labeled antibodies bind to M. tuberculosis, if present. Antibody-specific fluorescentdyes can be used to view the mycobacteria with a fluorescence microscope.Micro Connections76 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.36 Ziehl-Neelsen staining has rendered these Mycobacterium tuberculosis cells red and thesurrounding growth indicator medium blue. (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Capsule StainingCertain bacteria and yeasts have a protective outer structure called a capsule. Since the presence of a capsule isdirectly related to a microbe’s virulence (its ability to cause disease), the ability to determine whether cells in a samplehave capsules is an important diagnostic tool. Capsules do not absorb most basic dyes; therefore, a negative stainingtechnique (staining around the cells) is typically used for capsule staining. The dye stains the background but doesnot penetrate the capsules, which appear like halos around the borders of the cell. The specimen does not need to beheat-fixed prior to negative staining.One common negative staining technique for identifying encapsulated yeast and bacteria is to add a few drops of Indiaink or nigrosin to a specimen. Other capsular stains can also be used to negatively stain encapsulated cells (Figure2.37). Alternatively, positive and negative staining techniques can be combined to visualize capsules: The positivestain colors the body of the cell, and the negative stain colors the background but not the capsule, leaving halo aroundeach cell.Figure 2.37 (a) India-ink was used to stain the background around these cells of the yeast Cryptococcusneoformans. The halos surrounding the cells are the polysaccharide capsules. (b) Crystal violet and copper sulfatedyes cannot penetrate the encapsulated Bacillus cells in this negatively stained sample. Encapsulated cells appear tohave a light-blue halo. (credit a: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit b: modification ofwork by American Society for Microbiology)Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 77• How does negative staining help us visualize capsules?Endospore StainingEndospores are structures produced within certain bacterial cells that allow them to survive harsh conditions. Gramstaining alone cannot be used to visualize endospores, which appear clear when Gram-stained cells are viewed.Endospore staining uses two stains to differentiate endospores from the rest of the cell. The Schaeffer-Fulton method(the most commonly used endospore-staining technique) uses heat to push the primary stain (malachite green) intothe endospore. Washing with water decolorizes the cell, but the endospore retains the green stain. The cell is thencounterstained pink with safranin. The resulting image reveals the shape and location of endospores, if they arepresent. The green endospores will appear either within the pink vegetative cells or as separate from the pink cellsaltogether. If no endospores are present, then only the pink vegetative cells will be visible (Figure 2.38).Figure 2.38 A stained preparation of Bacillus subtilis showing endospores as green and the vegetative cells as pink.(credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)Endospore-staining techniques are important for identifying Bacillus and Clostridium, two genera of endosporeproducingbacteria that contain clinically significant species. Among others, B. anthracis (which causes anthrax) hasbeen of particular interest because of concern that its spores could be used as a bioterrorism agent. C. difficile is aparticularly important species responsible for the typically hospital-acquired infection known as “C. diff.”• Is endospore staining an example of positive, negative, or differential staining?Flagella StainingFlagella (singular: flagellum) are tail-like cellular structures used for locomotion by some bacteria, archaea, andeukaryotes. Because they are so thin, flagella typically cannot be seen under a light microscope without a specializedflagella staining technique. Flagella staining thickens the flagella by first applying mordant (generally tannic acid,but sometimes potassium alum), which coats the flagella; then the specimen is stained with pararosaniline (mostcommonly) or basic fuchsin (Figure 2.39).78 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 2.39 A flagella stain of Bacillus cereus, a common cause of foodborne illness, reveals that the cells havenumerous flagella, used for locomotion. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Though flagella staining is uncommon in clinical settings, the technique is commonly used by microbiologists, sincethe location and number of flagella can be useful in classifying and identifying bacteria in a sample. When using thistechnique, it is important to handle the specimen with great care; flagella are delicate structures that can easily bedamaged or pulled off, compromising attempts to accurately locate and count the number of flagella.Figure 2.40 (credit “basic stains”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “Acidicstains”: modification of work by Roberto Danovaro, Antonio Dell’Anno, Antonio Pusceddu, Cristina Gambi, IbenHeiner, Reinhardt Mobjerg Kristensen; credit “Negative stains”: modification of work by Anh-Hue Tu)Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 79Figure 2.41 (credit “Gram stain”: modification of work by Nina Parker; credit “Acid-fast stain”: modification of work byAmerican Society for Microbiology; credit “Endospore stain”: modification of work by American Society forMicrobiology; credit “Capsule stain” : modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit “Flagellastain”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)80 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Preparing Specimens for Electron MicroscopySamples to be analyzed using a TEM must have very thin sections. But cells are too soft to cut thinly, even withdiamond knives. To cut cells without damage, the cells must be embedded in plastic resin and then dehydrated througha series of soaks in ethanol solutions (50%, 60%, 70%, and so on). The ethanol replaces the water in the cells, and theresin dissolves in ethanol and enters the cell, where it solidifies. Next, thin sections are cut using a specialized devicecalled an ultramicrotome (Figure 2.42). Finally, samples are fixed to fine copper wire or carbon-fiber grids andstained—not with colored dyes, but with substances like uranyl acetate or osmium tetroxide, which contain electrondenseheavy metal atoms.Figure 2.42 (a) An ultramicrotome used to prepare specimens for a TEM. (b) A technician uses an ultramicrotome toslice a specimen into thin sections. (credit a: modification of work by “Frost Museum”/Flickr; credit b: modification ofwork by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Northeast Region)When samples are prepared for viewing using an SEM, they must also be dehydrated using an ethanol series.However, they must be even drier than is necessary for a TEM. Critical point drying with inert liquid carbon dioxideunder pressure is used to displace the water from the specimen. After drying, the specimens are sputter-coated withmetal by knocking atoms off of a palladium target, with energetic particles. Sputter-coating prevents specimens frombecoming charged by the SEM’s electron beam.• Why is it important to dehydrate cells before examining them under an electron microscope?• Name the device that is used to create thin sections of specimens for electron microscopy.Using Microscopy to Diagnose SyphilisThe causative agent of syphilis is Treponema pallidum, a flexible, spiral cell (spirochete) that can be verythin (<0.15 μm) and match the refractive index of the medium, making it difficult to view using brightfieldmicroscopy. Additionally, this species has not been successfully cultured in the laboratory on an artificialmedium; therefore, diagnosis depends upon successful identification using microscopic techniques andserology (analysis of body fluids, often looking for antibodies to a pathogen). Since fixation and staining wouldkill the cells, darkfield microscopy is typically used for observing live specimens and viewing their movements.However, other approaches can also be used. For example, the cells can be thickened with silver particles(in tissue sections) and observed using a light microscope. It is also possible to use fluorescence or electronmicroscopy to view Treponema (Figure 2.43).Micro ConnectionsChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 81Figure 2.43 (a) Living, unstained Treponema pallidum spirochetes can be viewed under a darkfieldmicroscope. (b) In this brightfield image, a modified Steiner silver stain is used to visualized T. pallidumspirochetes. Though the stain kills the cells, it increases the contrast to make them more visible. (c) While notused for standard diagnostic testing, T. pallidum can also be examined using scanning electron microscopy.(credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of workby Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Controland Prevention)In clinical settings, indirect immunofluorescence is often used to identify Treponema. A primary, unstainedantibody attaches directly to the pathogen surface, and secondary antibodies “tagged” with a fluorescent stainattach to the primary antibody. Multiple secondary antibodies can attach to each primary antibody, amplifyingthe amount of stain attached to each Treponema cell, making them easier to spot (Figure 2.44).Figure 2.44 Indirect immunofluorescence can be used to identify T. pallidum, the causative agent of syphilis,in a specimen.Preparation and Staining for Other MicroscopesSamples for fluorescence and confocal microscopy are prepared similarly to samples for light microscopy, exceptthat the dyes are fluorochromes. Stains are often diluted in liquid before applying to the slide. Some dyes attach toan antibody to stain specific proteins on specific types of cells (immunofluorescence); others may attach to DNAmolecules in a process called fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), causing cells to be stained based on whetherthey have a specific DNA sequence.Sample preparation for two-photon microscopy is similar to fluorescence microscopy, except for the use of infrareddyes. Specimens for STM need to be on a very clean and atomically smooth surface. They are often mica coated withAu(111). Toluene vapor is a common fixative.82 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What is the main difference between preparing a sample for fluorescence microscopy versus lightmicroscopy?Cornell University’s Case Studies in Microscopy (https://www.openstax.org/l/22cornellstud) offers a series of clinical problems based on real-life events.Each case study walks you through a clinical problem using appropriatetechniques in microscopy at each step.ResolutionFrom the results of the Gram stain, the technician now knows that Cindy’s infection is caused by spherical,gram-positive bacteria that form grape-like clusters, which is typical of staphylococcal bacteria. After someadditional testing, the technician determines that these bacteria are the medically important species known asStaphylococcus aureus, a common culprit in wound infections. Because some strains of S. aureus are resistantto many antibiotics, skin infections may spread to other areas of the body and become serious, sometimeseven resulting in amputations or death if the correct antibiotics are not used.After testing several antibiotics, the lab is able to identify one that is effective against this particular strain of S.aureus. Cindy’s doctor quickly prescribes the medication and emphasizes the importance of taking the entirecourse of antibiotics, even if the infection appears to clear up before the last scheduled dose. This reducesthe risk that any especially resistant bacteria could survive, causing a second infection or spreading to anotherperson.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Microscopy and Antibiotic ResistanceAs the use of antibiotics has proliferated in medicine, as well as agriculture, microbes have evolved to becomemore resistant. Strains of bacteria such as methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), which has developed ahigh level of resistance to many antibiotics, are an increasingly worrying problem, so much so that research isunderway to develop new and more diversified antibiotics.Fluorescence microscopy can be useful in testing the effectiveness of new antibiotics against resistantstrains like MRSA. In a test of one new antibiotic derived from a marine bacterium, MC21-A (bromophene),researchers used the fluorescent dye SYTOX Green to stain samples of MRSA. SYTOX Green is often usedLink to LearningClinical FocusEye on EthicsChapter 2 | How We See the Invisible World 83to distinguish dead cells from living cells, with fluorescence microscopy. Live cells will not absorb the dye, butcells killed by an antibiotic will absorb the dye, since the antibiotic has damaged the bacterial cell membrane.In this particular case, MRSA bacteria that had been exposed to MC21-A did, indeed, appear green under thefluorescence microscope, leading researchers to conclude that it is an effective antibiotic against MRSA.Of course, some argue that developing new antibiotics will only lead to even more antibiotic-resistant microbes,so-called superbugs that could spawn epidemics before new treatments can be developed. For this reason,many health professionals are beginning to exercise more discretion in prescribing antibiotics. Whereasantibiotics were once routinely prescribed for common illnesses without a definite diagnosis, doctors andhospitals are much more likely to conduct additional testing to determine whether an antibiotic is necessaryand appropriate before prescribing.A sick patient might reasonably object to this stingy approach to prescribing antibiotics. To the patient whosimply wants to feel better as quickly as possible, the potential benefits of taking an antibiotic may seem tooutweigh any immediate health risks that might occur if the antibiotic is ineffective. But at what point do therisks of widespread antibiotic use supersede the desire to use them in individual cases?Summary2.1 The Properties of Light• Light waves interacting with materials may be reflected, absorbed, or transmitted, depending on theproperties of the material.• Light waves can interact with each other (interference) or be distorted by interactions with small objects oropenings (diffraction).• Refraction occurs when light waves change speed and direction as they pass from one medium to another.Differences in the refraction indices of two materials determine the magnitude of directional changes whenlight passes from one to the other.• A lens is a medium with a curved surface that refracts and focuses light to produce an image.• Visible light is part of the electromagnetic spectrum; light waves of different frequencies and wavelengthsare distinguished as colors by the human eye.• A prism can separate the colors of white light (dispersion) because different frequencies of light have differentrefractive indices for a given material.• Fluorescent dyes and phosphorescent materials can effectively transform nonvisible electromagneticradiation into visible light.• The power of a microscope can be described in terms of its magnification and resolution.• Resolution can be increased by shortening wavelength, increasing the numerical aperture of the lens, orusing stains that enhance contrast.2.2 Peering Into the Invisible World• Antonie van Leeuwenhoek is credited with the first observation of microbes, including protists and bacteria,with simple microscopes that he made.• Robert Hooke was the first to describe what we now call cells.• Simple microscopes have a single lens, while compound microscopes have multiple lenses.2.3 Instruments of Microscopy• Numerous types of microscopes use various technologies to generate micrographs. Most are useful for aparticular type of specimen or application.• Light microscopy uses lenses to focus light on a specimen to produce an image. Commonly used lightmicroscopes include brightfield, darkfield, phase-contrast, differential interference contrast,84 Chapter 2 | How We See the Invisible WorldThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5fluorescence, confocal, and two-photon microscopes.• Electron microscopy focuses electrons on the specimen using magnets, producing much greatermagnification than light microscopy. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) and scanning electronmicroscope (SEM) are two common forms.• Scanning probe microscopy produces images of even greater magnification by measuring feedback fromsharp probes that interact with the specimen. Probe microscopes include the scanning tunneling microscope(STM) and the atomic force microscope (AFM).2.4 Staining Microscopic Specimens• Samples must be properly prepared for microscopy. This may involve staining, fixation, and/or cutting thinsections.• A variety of staining techniques can be used with light microscopy, including Gram staining, acid-faststaining, capsule staining, endospore staining, and flagella staining.• Samples for TEM require very thin sections, whereas samples for SEM require sputter-coating.• Preparation for fluorescence microscopy is similar to that for light microscopy, except that fluorochromes are used.