Chapter 5The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyFigure 5.1 Malaria is a disease caused by a eukaryotic parasite transmitted to humans by mosquitos. Micrographs(left and center) show a sporozoite life stage, trophozoites, and a schizont in a blood smear. On the right is depicted aprimary defense against mosquito-borne illnesses like malaria—mosquito netting. (credit left: modification of work byUte Frevert; credit middle: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit right:modification of work by Tjeerd Wiersma)Chapter Outline5.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic Parasites5.2 Parasitic Helminths5.3 Fungi5.4 Algae5.5 LichensIntroductionAlthough bacteria and viruses account for a large number of the infectious diseases that afflict humans, many seriousillnesses are caused by eukaryotic organisms. One example is malaria, which is caused by Plasmodium, a eukaryoticorganism transmitted through mosquito bites. Malaria is a major cause of morbidity (illness) and mortality (death)that threatens 3.4 billion people worldwide.[1] In severe cases, organ failure and blood or metabolic abnormalitiescontribute to medical emergencies and sometimes death. Even after initial recovery, relapses may occur years later. Incountries where malaria is endemic, the disease represents a major public health challenge that can place a tremendousstrain on developing economies.Worldwide, major efforts are underway to reduce malaria infections. Efforts include the distribution of insecticidetreatedbed nets and the spraying of pesticides. Researchers are also making progress in their efforts to developeffective vaccines.[2] The President’s Malaria Initiative, started in 2005, supports prevention and treatment. The Billand Melinda Gates Foundation has a large initiative to eliminate malaria. Despite these efforts, malaria continues tocause long-term morbidity (such as intellectual disabilities in children) and mortality (especially in children youngerthan 5 years), so we still have far to go.1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Impact of Malaria.” September 22, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/malaria_worldwide/impact.html. Accessed January 18, 2016.2. RTS, S Clinical Trials Partnership. “Efficacy and safety of RTS,S/AS01 malaria vaccine with or without a booster dose in infants andchildren in Africa: final results of a phase 3, individually randomised, controlled trial.” The Lancet 23 April 2015. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60721-8.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 1975.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic ParasitesLearning Objectives• Summarize the general characteristics of unicellular eukaryotic parasites• Describe the general life cycles and modes of reproduction in unicellular eukaryotic parasites• Identify challenges associated with classifying unicellular eukaryotes• Explain the taxonomic scheme used for unicellular eukaryotes• Give examples of infections caused by unicellular eukaryotesEukaryotic microbes are an extraordinarily diverse group, including species with a wide range of life cycles,morphological specializations, and nutritional needs. Although more diseases are caused by viruses and bacteria thanby microscopic eukaryotes, these eukaryotes are responsible for some diseases of great public health importance.For example, the protozoal disease malaria was responsible for 584,000 deaths worldwide (primarily children inAfrica) in 2013, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The protist parasite Giardia causes a diarrhealillness (giardiasis) that is easily transmitted through contaminated water supplies. In the United States, Giardia isthe most common human intestinal parasite (Figure 5.3). Although it may seem surprising, parasitic worms areincluded within the study of microbiology because identification depends on observation of microscopic adult wormsor eggs. Even in developed countries, these worms are important parasites of humans and of domestic animals. Thereare fewer fungal pathogens, but these are important causes of illness, as well. On the other hand, fungi have beenPart 1Upon arriving home from school, 7-year-old Sarah complains that a large spot on her arm will not stop itching.She keeps scratching at it, drawing the attention of her parents. Looking more closely, they see that it is ared circular spot with a raised red edge (Figure 5.2). The next day, Sarah’s parents take her to their doctor,who examines the spot using a Wood’s lamp. A Wood’s lamp produces ultraviolet light that causes the spot onSarah’s arm to fluoresce, which confirms what the doctor already suspected: Sarah has a case of ringworm.Sarah’s mother is mortified to hear that her daughter has a “worm.” How could this happen?• What are some likely ways that Sarah might have contracted ringworm?Figure 5.2 Ringworm presents as a raised, red ring on the skin. (credit: Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus198 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5important in producing antimicrobial substances such as penicillin. In this chapter, we will examine characteristics ofprotists, worms, and fungi while considering their roles in causing disease.Figure 5.3 (a) A scanning electron micrograph shows many Giardia parasites in the trophozoite, or feeding stage, ina gerbil intestine. (b) An individual trophozoite of G. lamblia, visualized here in a scanning electron micrograph. Thiswaterborne protist causes severe diarrhea when ingested. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Characteristics of ProtistsThe word protist is a historical term that is now used informally to refer to a diverse group of microscopic eukaryoticorganisms. It is not considered a formal taxonomic term because the organisms it describes do not have a sharedevolutionary origin. Historically, the protists were informally grouped into the “animal-like” protozoans, the “plantlike”algae, and the “fungus-like” protists such as water molds. These three groups of protists differ greatly in termsof their basic characteristics. For example, algae are photosynthetic organisms that can be unicellular or multicellular.Protozoa, on the other hand, are nonphotosynthetic, motile organisms that are always unicellular. Other informalterms may also be used to describe various groups of protists. For example, microorganisms that drift or float inwater, moved by currents, are referred to as plankton. Types of plankton include zooplankton, which are motile andnonphotosynthetic, and phytoplankton, which are photosynthetic.Protozoans inhabit a wide variety of habitats, both aquatic and terrestrial. Many are free-living, while others areparasitic, carrying out a life cycle within a host or hosts and potentially causing illness. There are also beneficialsymbionts that provide metabolic services to their hosts. During the feeding and growth part of their life cycle, theyare called trophozoites; these feed on small particulate food sources such as bacteria. While some types of protozoaexist exclusively in the trophozoite form, others can develop from trophozoite to an encapsulated cyst stage whenenvironmental conditions are too harsh for the trophozoite. A cyst is a cell with a protective wall, and the process bywhich a trophozoite becomes a cyst is called encystment. When conditions become more favorable, these cysts aretriggered by environmental cues to become active again through excystment.One protozoan genus capable of encystment is Eimeria, which includes some human and animal pathogens. Figure5.4 illustrates the life cycle of Eimeria.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 199Figure 5.4 In the sexual/asexual life cycle of Eimeria, oocysts (inset) are shed in feces and may cause diseasewhen ingested by a new host. (credit “life cycle,” “micrograph”: modification of work by USDA)Protozoans have a variety of reproductive mechanisms. Some protozoans reproduce asexually and others reproducesexually; still others are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction. In protozoans, asexual reproduction occursby binary fission, budding, or schizogony. In schizogony, the nucleus of a cell divides multiple times before the celldivides into many smaller cells. The products of schizogony are called merozoites and they are stored in structuresknown as schizonts. Protozoans may also reproduce sexually, which increases genetic diversity and can lead tocomplex life cycles. Protozoans can produce haploid gametes that fuse through syngamy. However, they can alsoexchange genetic material by joining to exchange DNA in a process called conjugation. This is a different processthan the conjugation that occurs in bacteria. The term protist conjugation refers to a true form of eukaryotic sexualreproduction between two cells of different mating types. It is found in ciliates, a group of protozoans, and isdescribed later in this subsection.All protozoans have a plasma membrane, or plasmalemma, and some have bands of protein just inside the membranethat add rigidity, forming a structure called the pellicle. Some protists, including protozoans, have distinct layersof cytoplasm under the membrane. In these protists, the outer gel layer (with microfilaments of actin) is called theectoplasm. Inside this layer is a sol (fluid) region of cytoplasm called the endoplasm. These structures contribute tocomplex cell shapes in some protozoans, whereas others (such as amoebas) have more flexible shapes (Figure 5.5).Different groups of protozoans have specialized feeding structures. They may have a specialized structure for takingin food through phagocytosis, called a cytostome, and a specialized structure for the exocytosis of wastes called acytoproct. Oral grooves leading to cytostomes are lined with hair-like cilia to sweep in food particles. Protozoansare heterotrophic. Protozoans that are holozoic ingest whole food particles through phagocytosis. Forms that are200 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5saprozoic ingest small, soluble food molecules.Many protists have whip-like flagella or hair-like cilia made of microtubules that can be used for locomotion (Figure5.5). Other protists use cytoplasmic extensions known as pseudopodia (“false feet”) to attach the cell to a surface;they then allow cytoplasm to flow into the extension, thus moving themselves forward.Protozoans have a variety of unique organelles and sometimes lack organelles found in other cells. Some havecontractile vacuoles, organelles that can be used to move water out of the cell for osmotic regulation (salt and waterbalance) (Figure 5.5). Mitochondria may be absent in parasites or altered to kinetoplastids (modified mitochondria)or hydrogenosomes (see Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells for more discussion of these structures).Figure 5.5 (a) Paramecium spp. have hair-like appendages called cilia for locomotion. (b) Amoeba spp. use lobelikepseudopodia to anchor the cell to a solid surface and pull forward. (c) Euglena spp. use a whip-like structurecalled a flagellum to propel the cell.• What is the sequence of events in reproduction by schizogony and what are the cells produced called?Taxonomy of ProtistsThe protists are a polyphyletic group, meaning they lack a shared evolutionary origin. Since the current taxonomy isbased on evolutionary history (as determined by biochemistry, morphology, and genetics), protists are scattered acrossmany different taxonomic groups within the domain Eukarya. Eukarya is currently divided into six supergroups thatare further divided into subgroups, as illustrated in (Figure 5.6). In this section, we will primarily be concernedwith the supergroups Amoebozoa, Excavata, and Chromalveolata; these supergroups include many protozoans ofclinical significance. The supergroups Opisthokonta and Rhizaria also include some protozoans, but few of clinicalsignificance. In addition to protozoans, Opisthokonta also includes animals and fungi, some of which we will discussin Parasitic Helminths and Fungi. Some examples of the Archaeplastida will be discussed in Algae. Figure 5.7and Figure 5.8 summarize the characteristics of each supergroup and subgroup and list representatives of each.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 201Figure 5.6 This tree shows a proposed classification of the domain Eukarya based on evolutionary relationships.Currently, the domain Eukarya is divided into six supergroups. Within each supergroup are multiple kingdoms. Dottedlines indicate suggested evolutionary relationships that remain under debate.202 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.7Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 203Figure 5.8• Which supergroups contain the clinically significant protists?204 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5AmoebozoaThe supergroup Amoebozoa includes protozoans that use amoeboid movement. Actin microfilaments producepseudopodia, into which the remainder of the protoplasm flows, thereby moving the organism. The genus Entamoebaincludes commensal or parasitic species, including the medically important E. histolytica, which is transmitted bycysts in feces and is the primary cause of amoebic dysentery. The notorious “brain-eating amoeba,” Naegleria fowleri,is also classified within the Amoebozoa. This deadly parasite is found in warm, fresh water and causes primaryamoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM). Another member of this group is Acanthamoeba, which can cause keratitis(corneal inflammation) and blindness.The Eumycetozoa are an unusual group of organisms called slime molds, which have previously been classifiedas animals, fungi, and plants (Figure 5.9). Slime molds can be divided into two types: cellular slime molds andplasmodial slime molds. The cellular slime molds exist as individual amoeboid cells that periodically aggregateinto a mobile slug. The aggregate then forms a fruiting body that produces haploid spores. Plasmodial slime moldsexist as large, multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks to produce spores that divide into gametes.One cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum, has been an important study organism for understanding celldifferentiation, because it has both single-celled and multicelled life stages, with the cells showing some degreeof differentiation in the multicelled form. Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11 illustrate the life cycles of cellular andplasmodial slime molds, respectively.Figure 5.9 (a) The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum can be grown on agar in a Petri dish. In this image,individual amoeboid cells (visible as small spheres) are streaming together to form an aggregation that is beginning torise in the upper right corner of the image. The primitively multicellular aggregation consists of individual cells thateach have their own nucleus. (b) Fuligo septica is a plasmodial slime mold. This brightly colored organism consists ofa large cell with many nuclei.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 205Figure 5.10 The life cycle of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum primarily involves individual amoebasbut includes the formation of a multinucleate plasmodium formed from a uninucleate zygote (the result of the fusion oftwo individual amoeboid cells). The plasmodium is able to move and forms a fruiting body that generates haploidspores. (credit “photo”: modification of work by “thatredhead4”/Flickr)206 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.11 Plasmodial slime molds exist as large multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks toproduce spores that divide into gametes.ChromalveolataThe supergroup Chromalveolata is united by similar origins of its members’ plastids and includes the apicomplexans,ciliates, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, among other groups (we will cover the diatoms and dinoflagellates in Algae).The apicomplexans are intra- or extracellular parasites that have an apical complex at one end of the cell. Theapical complex is a concentration of organelles, vacuoles, and microtubules that allows the parasite to enter hostcells (Figure 5.12). Apicomplexans have complex life cycles that include an infective sporozoite that undergoesschizogony to make many merozoites (see the example in Figure 5.4). Many are capable of infecting a variety ofanimal cells, from insects to livestock to humans, and their life cycles often depend on transmission between multiplehosts. The genus Plasmodium is an example of this group.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 207Figure 5.12 (a) Apicomplexans are parasitic protists. They have a characteristic apical complex that enables themto infect host cells. (b) A colorized electron microscope image of a Plasmodium sporozoite. (credit b: modification ofwork by Ute Frevert)Other apicomplexans are also medically important. Cryptosporidium parvum causes intestinal symptoms and cancause epidemic diarrhea when the cysts contaminate drinking water. Theileria (Babesia) microti, transmitted by thetick Ixodes scapularis, causes recurring fever that can be fatal and is becoming a common transfusion-transmittedpathogen in the United States (Theileria and Babesia are closely related genera and there is some debate aboutthe best classification). Finally, Toxoplasma gondii causes toxoplasmosis and can be transmitted from cat feces,unwashed fruit and vegetables, or from undercooked meat. Because toxoplasmosis can be associated with seriousbirth defects, pregnant women need to be aware of this risk and use caution if they are exposed to the feces ofpotentially infected cats. A national survey found the frequency of individuals with antibodies for toxoplasmosis (andthus who presumably have a current latent infection) in the United States to be 11%. Rates are much higher in othercountries, including some developed countries.[3] There is also evidence and a good deal of theorizing that the parasitemay be responsible for altering infected humans’ behavior and personality traits.[4]The ciliates (Ciliaphora), also within the Chromalveolata, are a large, very diverse group characterized by thepresence of cilia on their cell surface. Although the cilia may be used for locomotion, they are often used forfeeding, as well, and some forms are nonmotile. Balantidium coli (Figure 5.13) is the only parasitic ciliatethat affects humans by causing intestinal illness, although it rarely causes serious medical issues except in theimmunocompromised (those having a weakened immune system). Perhaps the most familiar ciliate is Paramecium, amotile organism with a clearly visible cytostome and cytoproct that is often studied in biology laboratories (Figure5.14). Another ciliate, Stentor, is sessile and uses its cilia for feeding (Figure 5.15). Generally, these organismshave a micronucleus that is diploid, somatic, and used for sexual reproduction by conjugation. They also have amacronucleus that is derived from the micronucleus; the macronucleus becomes polyploid (multiple sets of duplicatechromosomes), and has a reduced set of metabolic genes.Ciliates are able to reproduce through conjugation, in which two cells attach to each other. In each cell, the diploidmicronuclei undergo meiosis, producing eight haploid nuclei each. Then, all but one of the haploid micronuclei andthe macronucleus disintegrate; the remaining (haploid) micronucleus undergoes mitosis. The two cells then exchangeone micronucleus each, which fuses with the remaining micronucleus present to form a new, genetically different,3. J. Flegr et al. “Toxoplasmosis—A Global Threat. Correlation of Latent Toxoplasmosis With Specific Disease Burden in a Set of 88Countries.” PloS ONE 9 no. 3 (2014):e90203.4. J. Flegr. “Effects of Toxoplasma on Human Behavior.” Schizophrenia Bull 33, no. 3 (2007):757–760.208 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5diploid micronucleus. The diploid micronucleus undergoes two mitotic divisions, so each cell has four micronuclei,and two of the four combine to form a new macronucleus. The chromosomes in the macronucleus then replicaterepeatedly, the macronucleus reaches its polyploid state, and the two cells separate. The two cells are now geneticallydifferent from each other and from their previous versions.Figure 5.13 This specimen of the ciliate Balantidium coli is a trophozoite form isolated from the gut of a primate. B.coli is the only ciliate capable of parasitizing humans. (credit: modification of work by Kouassi RYW, McGraw SW, YaoPK, Abou-Bacar A, Brunet J, Pesson B, Bonfoh B, N’goran EK & Candolfi E)Figure 5.14 Paramecium has a primitive mouth (called an oral groove) to ingest food, and an anal pore to excrete it.Contractile vacuoles allow the organism to excrete excess water. Cilia enable the organism to move.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 209Figure 5.15 This differential interference contrast micrograph (magnification: ×65) of Stentor roeselie shows ciliapresent on the margins of the structure surrounding the cytostome; the cilia move food particles. (credit: modificationof work by “picturepest”/Flickr)Öomycetes have similarities to fungi and were once classified with them. They are also called water molds. However,they differ from fungi in several important ways. Öomycetes have cell walls of cellulose (unlike the chitinous cellwalls of fungi) and they are generally diploid, whereas the dominant life forms of fungi are typically haploid.Phytophthora, the plant pathogen found in the soil that caused the Irish potato famine, is classified within this group(Figure 5.16).Figure 5.16 A saprobic oomycete, or water mold, engulfs a dead insect. (credit: modification of work by ThomasBresson)210 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Explore the procedures for detecting the presence of an apicomplexan in apublic water supply, at this (https://openstax.org/l/22detpreapicom) website.This video (https://openstax.org/l/22feedstentor) shows the feeding ofStentor.ExcavataThe third and final supergroup to be considered in this section is the Excavata, which includes primitive eukaryotesand many parasites with limited metabolic abilities. These organisms have complex cell shapes and structures, oftenincluding a depression on the surface of the cell called an excavate. The group Excavata includes the subgroupsFornicata, Parabasalia, and Euglenozoa. The Fornicata lack mitochondria but have flagella. This group includesGiardia lamblia (also known as G. intestinalis or G. duodenalis), a widespread pathogen that causes diarrhealillness and can be spread through cysts from feces that contaminate water supplies (Figure 5.3). Parabasalia arefrequent animal endosymbionts; they live in the guts of animals like termites and cockroaches. They have basalbodies and modified mitochondria (kinetoplastids). They also have a large, complex cell structure with an undulatingmembrane and often have many flagella. The trichomonads (a subgroup of the Parabasalia) include pathogens suchas Trichomonas vaginalis, which causes the human sexually transmitted disease trichomoniasis. Trichomoniasis oftendoes not cause symptoms in men, but men are able to transmit the infection. In women, it causes vaginal discomfortand discharge and may cause complications in pregnancy if left untreated.The Euglenozoa are common in the environment and include photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic species. Membersof the genus Euglena are typically not pathogenic. Their cells have two flagella, a pellicle, a stigma (eyespot) to senselight, and chloroplasts for photosynthesis (Figure 5.17). The pellicle of Euglena is made of a series of protein bandssurrounding the cell; it supports the cell membrane and gives the cell shape.The Euglenozoa also include the trypanosomes, which are parasitic pathogens. The genus Trypanosoma includesT. brucei, which causes African trypanosomiasis (African sleeping sickness and T. cruzi, which causes Americantrypanosomiasis (Chagas disease). These tropical diseases are spread by insect bites. In African sleeping sickness, T.brucei colonizes the blood and the brain after being transmitted via the bite of a tsetse fly (Glossina spp.) (Figure5.18). The early symptoms include confusion, difficulty sleeping, and lack of coordination. Left untreated, it is fatal.Figure 5.17 (a) This illustration of a Euglena shows the characteristic structures, such as the stigma and flagellum.(b) The pellicle, under the cell membrane, gives the cell its distinctive shape and is visible in this image as delicateparallel striations over the surface of the entire cell (especially visible over the grey contractile vacuole). (credit a:modification of work by Claudio Miklos; credit b: modification of work by David Shykind)Link to LearningChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 211Figure 5.18 Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African trypanosomiasis, spends part of its life cycle in thetsetse fly and part in humans. (credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit “photo”: DPDx/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chagas’ disease originated and is most common in Latin America. The disease is transmitted by Triatoma spp., insectsoften called “kissing bugs,” and affects either the heart tissue or tissues of the digestive system. Untreated cases caneventually lead to heart failure or significant digestive or neurological disorders.The genus Leishmania includes trypanosomes that cause disfiguring skin disease and sometimes systemic illness aswell.Neglected ParasitesThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is responsible for identifying public health prioritiesin the United States and developing strategies to address areas of concern. As part of this mandate, theEye on Ethics212 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5CDC has officially identified five parasitic diseases it considers to have been neglected (i.e., not adequatelystudied). These neglected parasitic infections (NPIs) include toxoplasmosis, Chagas disease, toxocariasis(a nematode infection transmitted primarily by infected dogs), cysticercosis (a disease caused by a tissueinfection of the tapeworm Taenia solium), and trichomoniasis (a sexually transmitted disease caused by theparabasalid Trichomonas vaginalis).The decision to name these specific diseases as NPIs means that the CDC will devote resources towardimproving awareness and developing better diagnostic testing and treatment through studies of available data.The CDC may also advise on treatment of these diseases and assist in the distribution of medications thatmight otherwise be difficult to obtain.[5]Of course, the CDC does not have unlimited resources, so by prioritizing these five diseases, it is effectivelydeprioritizing others. Given that many Americans have never heard of many of these NPIs, it is fair to askwhat criteria the CDC used in prioritizing diseases. According to the CDC, the factors considered were thenumber of people infected, the severity of the illness, and whether the illness can be treated or prevented.Although several of these NPIs may seem to be more common outside the United States, the CDC argues thatmany cases in the United States likely go undiagnosed and untreated because so little is known about thesediseases.[6]What criteria should be considered when prioritizing diseases for purposes of funding or research? Are thoseidentified by the CDC reasonable? What other factors could be considered? Should government agencies likethe CDC have the same criteria as private pharmaceutical research labs? What are the ethical implications ofdeprioritizing other potentially neglected parasitic diseases such as leishmaniasis?5.2 Parasitic HelminthsLearning Objectives• Explain why we include the study of parasitic worms within the discipline of microbiology• Compare the basic morphology of the major groups of parasitic helminthes• Describe the characteristics of parasitic nematodes, and give an example of infective eggs and infective larvae• Describe the characteristics of parasitic trematodes and cestodes, and give examples of each• Identify examples of the primary causes of infections due to nematodes, trematodes, and cestodes• Classify parasitic worms according to major groupsParasitic helminths are animals that are often included within the study of microbiology because many species ofthese worms are identified by their microscopic eggs and larvae. There are two major groups of parasitic helminths:the roundworms (Nematoda) and flatworms (Platyhelminthes). Of the many species that exist in these groups, abouthalf are parasitic and some are important human pathogens. As animals, they are multicellular and have organsystems. However, the parasitic species often have limited digestive tracts, nervous systems, and locomotor abilities.Parasitic forms may have complex reproductive cycles with several different life stages and more than one type ofhost. Some are monoecious, having both male and female reproductive organs in a single individual, while others aredioecious, each having either male or female reproductive organs.5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Neglected Parasitic Infections (NPIs) in the United States.” http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/npi/. Last updated July 10, 2014.6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fact Sheet: Neglected Parasitic Infections in the United States.” http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/resources/pdf/npi_factsheet.pdfChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 213Nematoda (Roundworms)Phylum Nematoda (the roundworms) is a diverse group containing more than 15,000 species, of which severalare important human parasites (Figure 5.19). These unsegmented worms have a full digestive system even whenparasitic. Some are common intestinal parasites, and their eggs can sometimes be identified in feces or around theanus of infected individuals. Ascaris lumbricoides is the largest nematode intestinal parasite found in humans; femalesmay reach lengths greater than 1 meter. A. lumbricoides is also very widespread, even in developed nations, althoughit is now a relatively uncommon problem in the United States. It may cause symptoms ranging from relatively mild(such as a cough and mild abdominal pain) to severe (such as intestinal blockage and impaired growth).Figure 5.19 A micrograph of the nematode Enterobius vermicularis, also known as the pinworm. (credit:modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Of all nematode infections in the United States, pinworm (caused by Enterobius vermicularis) is the most common.Pinworm causes sleeplessness and itching around the anus, where the female worms lay their eggs during the night.Toxocara canis and T. cati are nematodes found in dogs and cats, respectively, that can be transmitted to humans,causing toxocariasis. Antibodies to these parasites have been found in approximately 13.9% of the U.S. population,suggesting that exposure is common.[7] Infection can cause larval migrans, which can result in vision loss and eyeinflammation, or fever, fatigue, coughing, and abdominal pain, depending on whether the organism infects the eyeor the viscera. Another common nematode infection is hookworm, which is caused by Necator americanus (theNew World or North American hookworm) and Ancylostoma duodenale (the Old World hookworm). Symptoms ofhookworm infection can include abdominal pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, and anemia.Trichinellosis, also called trichinosis, caused by Trichinella spiralis, is contracted by consuming undercooked meat,which releases the larvae and allows them to encyst in muscles. Infection can cause fever, muscle pains, and digestivesystem problems; severe infections can lead to lack of coordination, breathing and heart problems, and even death.Finally, heartworm in dogs and other animals is caused by the nematode Dirofilaria immitis, which is transmitted bymosquitoes. Symptoms include fatigue and cough; when left untreated, death may result.Part 2The physician explains to Sarah’s mother that ringworm can be transferred between people through touch.Clinical Focus7. Won K, Kruszon-Moran D, Schantz P, Jones J. “National seroprevalence and risk factors for zoonotic Toxocara spp. infection.” In:Abstracts of the 56th American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2007 Nov 4-8.214 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5“It’s common in school children, because they often come in close contact with each other, but anyone canbecome infected,” he adds. “Because you can transfer it through objects, locker rooms and public pools arealso a potential source of infection. It’s very common among wrestlers and athletes in other contact sports.”Looking very uncomfortable, Sarah says to her mother “I want this worm out of me.”The doctor laughs and says, “Sarah, you’re in luck because ringworm is just a name; it is not an actual worm.You have nothing wriggling around under your skin.”“Then what is it?” asks Sarah.• What type of pathogen causes ringworm?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.• What is the most common nematode infection in the United States?Platyhelminths (Flatworms)Phylum Platyhelminthes (the platyhelminths) are flatworms. This group includes the flukes, tapeworms, and theturbellarians, which include planarians. The flukes and tapeworms are medically important parasites (Figure 5.20).The flukes (trematodes) are nonsegmented flatworms that have an oral sucker (Figure 5.21) (and sometimes asecond ventral sucker) and attach to the inner walls of intestines, lungs, large blood vessels, or the liver. Trematodeshave complex life cycles, often with multiple hosts. Several important examples are the liver flukes (Clonorchisand Opisthorchis), the intestinal fluke (Fasciolopsis buski), and the oriental lung fluke (Paragonimus westermani).Schistosomiasis is a serious parasitic disease, considered second in the scale of its impact on human populations onlyto malaria. The parasites Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, and S. japonicum, which are found in freshwatersnails, are responsible for schistosomiasis (Figure 5.22). Immature forms burrow through the skin into the blood.They migrate to the lungs, then to the liver and, later, other organs. Symptoms include anemia, malnutrition, fever,abdominal pain, fluid buildup, and sometimes death.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 215Figure 5.20 Phylum Platyhelminthes is divided into four classes. (a) Class Turbellaria includes the Bedford’sflatworm (Pseudobiceros bedfordi), which is about 8–10 cm long. (b) The parasitic class Monogenea includesDactylogyrus spp. Worms in this genus are commonly called gill flukes. The specimen pictured here is about 0.2 mmlong and has two anchors, indicated by arrows, that it uses to latch onto the gills of host fish. (c) The Trematoda classincludes the common liver fluke Fasciola hepatica and the giant liver fluke Fascioloides magna (right). The F. magnaspecimen shown here is about 7 cm long. (d) Class Cestoda includes tapeworms such as Taenia saginata, whichinfects both cattle and humans and can reach lengths of 4–10 meters; the specimen shown here is about 4 meterslong. (credit c: modification of work by “Flukeman”/Wikimedia Commons)216 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.21 (a) The oral sucker is visible on the anterior end of this liver fluke, Opisthorchis viverrini. (b) Thismicrograph shows the scolex of the cestode Taenia solium, also known as the pork tapeworm. The visible suckersand hooks allow the worm to attach itself to the inner wall of the intestine. (credit a: modification of work by Sripa B,Kaewkes S, Sithithaworn P, Mairiang E, Laha T, and Smout M; credit b: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)The other medically important group of platyhelminths are commonly known as tapeworms (cestodes) and aresegmented flatworms that may have suckers or hooks at the scolex (head region) (Figure 5.21). Tapeworms usethese suckers or hooks to attach to the wall of the small intestine. The body of the worm is made up of segmentscalled proglottids that contain reproductive structures; these detach when the gametes are fertilized, releasing gravidproglottids with eggs. Tapeworms often have an intermediate host that consumes the eggs, which then hatch into alarval form called an oncosphere. The oncosphere migrates to a particular tissue or organ in the intermediate host,where it forms cysticerci. After being eaten by the definitive host, the cysticerci develop into adult tapeworms in thehost's digestive system (Figure 5.23). Taenia saginata (the beef tapeworm) and T. solium (the pork tapeworm) enterhumans through ingestion of undercooked, contaminated meat. The adult worms develop and reside in the intestine,but the larval stage may migrate and be found in other body locations such as skeletal and smooth muscle. The beeftapeworm is relatively benign, although it can cause digestive problems and, occasionally, allergic reactions. The porktapeworm can cause more serious problems when the larvae leave the intestine and colonize other tissues, includingthose of the central nervous system. Diphylobothrium latum is the largest human tapeworm and can be ingested inundercooked fish. It can grow to a length of 15 meters. Echinococcus granulosus, the dog tapeworm, can parasitizehumans and uses dogs as an important host.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 217Figure 5.22 The life cycle of Schistosoma spp. includes several species of water snails, which serve as secondaryhosts. The parasite is transmitted to humans through contact with contaminated water and takes up residence in theveins of the digestive system. Eggs escape the host in the urine or feces and infect a snail to complete the life cycle.(credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “step 3 photo”:modification of work by Fred A. Lewis, Yung-san Liang, Nithya Raghavan & Matty Knight)218 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.23 Life cycle of a tapeworm. (credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit “step 3 micrographs”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)• What group of medically important flatworms is segmented and what group is unsegmented?Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 219Food for Worms?For residents of temperate, developed countries, it may be difficult to imagine just how common helminthinfections are in the human population. In fact, they are quite common and even occur frequently in the UnitedStates. Worldwide, approximately 807–1,221 million people are infected with Ascaris lumbricoides (perhapsone-sixth of the human population) and far more are infected if all nematode species are considered.[8] Ratesof infection are relatively high even in industrialized nations. Approximately 604–795 million people are infectedwith whipworm (Trichuris) worldwide (Trichuris can also infect dogs), and 576–740 million people are infectedwith hookworm (Necator americanus and Ancylostoma duodenale).[9] Toxocara, a nematode parasite of dogsand cats, is also able to infect humans. It is widespread in the United States, with about 10,000 symptomaticcases annually. However, one study found 14% of the population (more than 40 million Americans) wasseropositive, meaning they had been exposed to the parasite at one time. More than 200 million people haveschistosomiasis worldwide. Most of the World Health Organization (WHO) neglected tropical diseases arehelminths. In some cases, helminths may cause subclinical illnesses, meaning the symptoms are so mild thatthat they go unnoticed. In other cases, the effects may be more severe or chronic, leading to fluid accumulationand organ damage. With so many people affected, these parasites constitute a major global public healthconcern.Eradicating the Guinea WormDracunculiasis, or Guinea worm disease, is caused by a nematode called Dracunculus medinensis. Whenpeople consume contaminated water, water fleas (small crustaceans) containing the nematode larvae may beingested. These larvae migrate out of the intestine, mate, and move through the body until females eventuallyemerge (generally through the feet). While Guinea worm disease is rarely fatal, it is extremely painful and canbe accompanied by secondary infections and edema (Figure 5.24).Figure 5.24 The Guinea worm can be removed from a leg vein of an infected person by gradually winding itaround a stick, like this matchstick. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)An eradication campaign led by WHO, the CDC, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the CarterCenter (founded by former U.S. president Jimmy Carter) has been extremely successful in reducing cases ofdracunculiasis. This has been possible because diagnosis is straightforward, there is an inexpensive methodof control, there is no animal reservoir, the water fleas are not airborne (they are restricted to still water),Micro ConnectionsMicro Connections8. Fenwick, A. “The global burden of neglected tropical diseases.” Public health 126 no.3 (Mar 2012): 233–6.9. de Silva, N., et. al. (2003). “Soil-transmitted helminth infections: updating the global picture”. Trends in Parasitology 19 (December2003): 547–51.220 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the disease is geographically limited, and there has been a commitment from the governments involved.Additionally, no vaccines or medication are required for treatment and prevention. In 1986, 3.5 million peoplewere estimated to be affected. After the eradication campaign, which included helping people in affected areaslearn to filter water with cloth, only four countries continue to report the disease (Chad, Mali, South Sudan, andEthiopia) with a total of 126 cases reported to WHO in 2014.[10]5.3 FungiLearning Objectives• Explain why the study of fungi such as yeast and molds is within the discipline of microbiology• Describe the unique characteristics of fungi• Describe examples of asexual and sexual reproduction of fungi• Compare the major groups of fungi in this chapter, and give examples of each• Identify examples of the primary causes of infections due to yeasts and molds• Identify examples of toxin-producing fungi• Classify fungal organisms according to major groupsThe fungi comprise a diverse group of organisms that are heterotrophic and typically saprozoic. In addition to thewell-known macroscopic fungi (such as mushrooms and molds), many unicellular yeasts and spores of macroscopicfungi are microscopic. For this reason, fungi are included within the field of microbiology.Fungi are important to humans in a variety of ways. Both microscopic and macroscopic fungi have medical relevance,with some pathogenic species that can cause mycoses (illnesses caused by fungi). Some pathogenic fungi areopportunistic, meaning that they mainly cause infections when the host’s immune defenses are compromised and donot normally cause illness in healthy individuals. Fungi are important in other ways. They act as decomposers in theenvironment, and they are critical for the production of certain foods such as cheeses. Fungi are also major sources ofantibiotics, such as penicillin from the fungus Penicillium.Characteristics of FungiFungi have well-defined characteristics that set them apart from other organisms. Most multicellular fungal bodies,commonly called molds, are made up of filaments called hyphae. Hyphae can form a tangled network called amycelium and form the thallus (body) of fleshy fungi. Hyphae that have walls between the cells are called septatehyphae; hyphae that lack walls and cell membranes between the cells are called nonseptate or coenocytic hyphae).(Figure 5.25).10. World Health Organization. “South Sudan Reports Zero Cases of Guinea-Worm Disease for Seventh Consecutive Month.” 2016.http://www.who.int/dracunculiasis/no_new_case_for_seventh_consecutive_months/en/. Accessed May 2, 2016.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 221Figure 5.25 Multicellular fungi (molds) form hyphae, which may be septate or nonseptate. Unicellular fungi (yeasts)cells form pseudohyphae from individual yeast cells.In contrast to molds, yeasts are unicellular fungi. The budding yeasts reproduce asexually by budding off a smallerdaughter cell; the resulting cells may sometimes stick together as a short chain or pseudohypha (Figure 5.25).Candida albicans is a common yeast that forms pseudohyphae; it is associated with various infections in humans,including vaginal yeast infections, oral thrush, and candidiasis of the skin.Some fungi are dimorphic, having more than one appearance during their life cycle. These dimorphic fungi maybe able to appear as yeasts or molds, which can be important for infectivity. They are capable of changing theirappearance in response to environmental changes such as nutrient availability or fluctuations in temperature, growingas a mold, for example, at 25 °C (77 °F), and as yeast cells at 37 °C (98.6 °F). This ability helps dimorphic fungi tosurvive in diverse environments. Histoplasma capsulatum, the pathogen that causes histoplasmosis, a lung infection,is an example of a dimorphic fungus (Figure 5.26).222 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.26 Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus that grows in soil exposed to bird feces or bat feces(guano) (top left). It can change forms to survive at different temperatures. In the outdoors, it typically grows as amycelium (as shown in the micrograph, bottom left), but when the spores are inhaled (right), it responds to the highinternal temperature of the body (37 °C [98.6 °F]) by turning into a yeast that can multiply in the lungs, causing thechronic lung disease histoplasmosis. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)There are notable unique features in fungal cell walls and membranes. Fungal cell walls contain chitin, as opposedto the cellulose found in the cell walls of plants and many protists. Additionally, whereas animals have cholesterol intheir cell membranes, fungal cell membranes have different sterols called ergosterols. Ergosterols are often exploitedas targets for antifungal drugs.Fungal life cycles are unique and complex. Fungi reproduce sexually either through cross- or self-fertilization.Haploid fungi form hyphae that have gametes at the tips. Two different mating types (represented as “+ type” and “–type”) are involved. The cytoplasms of the + and – type gametes fuse (in an event called plasmogamy), producinga cell with two distinct nuclei (a dikaryotic cell). Later, the nuclei fuse (in an event called karyogamy) to createa diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis to form spores that germinate to start the haploid stage, whicheventually creates more haploid mycelia (Figure 5.27). Depending on the taxonomic group, these sexually producedspores are known as zygospores (in Zygomycota), ascospores (in Ascomycota), or basidiospores (in Basidiomycota)(Figure 5.28).Fungi may also exhibit asexual reproduction by mitosis, mitosis with budding, fragmentation of hyphae, andformation of asexual spores by mitosis. These spores are specialized cells that, depending on the organism, may haveunique characteristics for survival, reproduction, and dispersal. Fungi exhibit several types of asexual spores and thesecan be important in classification.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 223Figure 5.27 Zygomycetes have sexual and asexual life cycles. In the sexual life cycle, + and – mating typesconjugate to form a zygosporangium.224 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.28 These images show asexually produced spores. (a) This brightfield micrograph shows the release ofspores from a sporangium at the end of a hypha called a sporangiophore. The organism is a Mucor sp. fungus, amold often found indoors. (b) Sporangia grow at the ends of stalks, which appear as the white fuzz seen on this breadmold, Rhizopus stolonifer. The tips of bread mold are the dark, spore-containing sporangia. (credit a: modification ofwork by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b right: modification of work by “Andrew”/Flickr)• Is a dimorphic fungus a yeast or a mold? Explain.Fungal DiversityThe fungi are very diverse, comprising seven major groups. Not all of the seven groups contain pathogens. Someof these groups are generally associated with plants and include plant pathogens. For example, Urediniomycetes andUstilagomycetes include the plant rusts and smuts, respectively. These form reddish or dark masses, respectively, onplants as rusts (red) or smuts (dark). Some species have substantial economic impact because of their ability to reducecrop yields. Glomeromycota includes the mycorrhizal fungi, important symbionts with plant roots that can promoteplant growth by acting like an extended root system. The Glomeromycota are obligate symbionts, meaning that theycan only survive when associated with plant roots; the fungi receive carbohydrates from the plant and the plantbenefits from the increased ability to take up nutrients and minerals from the soil. The Chytridiomycetes (chytrids)are small fungi, but are extremely ecologically important. Chytrids are generally aquatic and have flagellated, motilegametes; specific types are implicated in amphibian declines around the world. Because of their medical importance,we will focus on Zygomycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Microsporidia. Figure 5.33 summarizes thecharacteristics of these medically important groups of fungi.The Zygomycota (zygomycetes) are mainly saprophytes with coenocytic hyphae and haploid nuclei. They usesporangiospores for asexual reproduction. The group name comes from the zygospores that they use for sexualreproduction (Figure 5.27), which have hard walls formed from the fusion of reproductive cells from twoindividuals. Zygomycetes are important for food science and as crop pathogens. One example is Rhizopus stolonifer(Figure 5.28), an important bread mold that also causes rice seedling blight. Mucor is a genus of fungi that canpotentially cause necrotizing infections in humans, although most species are intolerant of temperatures found inmammalian bodies (Figure 5.28).The Ascomycota include fungi that are used as food (edible mushrooms, morels, and truffles), others that are commoncauses of food spoilage (bread molds and plant pathogens), and still others that are human pathogens. Ascomycotamay have septate hyphae and cup-shaped fruiting bodies called ascocarps. Some genera of Ascomycota use sexuallyproduced ascospores as well as asexual spores called conidia, but sexual phases have not been discovered ordescribed for others. Some produce an ascus containing ascospores within an ascocarp (Figure 5.29).Examples of the Ascomycota include several bread molds and minor pathogens, as well as species capable of causingChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 225more serious mycoses. Species in the genus Aspergillus are important causes of allergy and infection, and are useful inresearch and in the production of certain fermented alcoholic beverages such as Japanese sake. The fungus Aspergillusflavus, a contaminant of nuts and stored grains, produces an aflatoxin that is both a toxin and the most potentknown natural carcinogen. Neurospora crassa is of particular use in genetics research because the spores producedby meiosis are kept inside the ascus in a row that reflects the cell divisions that produced them, giving a direct viewof segregation and assortment of genes (Figure 5.30). Penicillium produces the antibiotic penicillin (Figure 5.29).Many species of ascomycetes are medically important. A large number of species in the genera Trichophyton,Microsporum, and Epidermophyton are dermatophytes, pathogenic fungi capable of causing skin infections such asathlete’s foot, jock itch, and ringworm. Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that can cause blastomycosis,a respiratory infection that, if left untreated, can become disseminated to other body sites, sometimes leading to death.Another important respiratory pathogen is the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum (Figure 5.26), which isassociated with birds and bats in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys. Coccidioides immitis causes the serious lungdisease Valley fever. Candida albicans, the most common cause of vaginal and other yeast infections, is also anascomycete fungus; it is a part of the normal microbiota of the skin, intestine, genital tract, and ear (Figure 5.29).Ascomycetes also cause plant diseases, including ergot infections, Dutch elm disease, and powdery mildews.Saccharomyces yeasts, including the baker’s yeast S. cerevisiae, are unicellular ascomycetes with haploid and diploidstages (Figure 5.31). This and other Saccharomyces species are used for brewing beer.Figure 5.29 (a) This brightfield micrograph shows ascospores being released from asci in the fungus Talaromycesflavus var. flavus. (b) This electron micrograph shows the conidia (spores) borne on the conidiophore of Aspergillus, atype of toxic fungus found mostly in soil and plants. (c) This brightfield micrograph shows the yeast Candida albicans,the causative agent of candidiasis and thrush. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Figure 5.30 These ascospores, lined up within an ascus, are produced sexually. (credit: Peter G. Werner)226 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.31 The life cycle of an ascomycete is characterized by the production of asci during the sexual phase. Thehaploid phase is the predominant phase of the life cycle.The Basidiomycota (basidiomycetes) are fungi that have basidia (club-shaped structures) that produce basidiospores(spores produced through budding) within fruiting bodies called basidiocarps (Figure 5.32). They are importantas decomposers and as food. This group includes rusts, stinkhorns, puffballs, and mushrooms. Several species are ofparticular importance. Cryptococcus neoformans, a fungus commonly found as a yeast in the environment, can causeserious lung infections when inhaled by individuals with weakened immune systems. The edible meadow mushroom,Agricus campestris, is a basidiomycete, as is the poisonous mushroom Amanita phalloides, known as the death cap.The deadly toxins produced by A. phalloides have been used to study transcription.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 227Figure 5.32 The life cycle of a basidiomycete alternates a haploid generation with a prolonged stage in which twonuclei (dikaryon) are present in the hyphae.Finally, the Microsporidia are unicellular fungi that are obligate intracellular parasites. They lack mitochondria,peroxisomes, and centrioles, but their spores release a unique polar tubule that pierces the host cell membrane toallow the fungus to gain entry into the cell. A number of microsporidia are human pathogens, and infections withmicrosporidia are called microsporidiosis. One pathogenic species is Enterocystozoan bieneusi, which can causesymptoms such as diarrhea, cholecystitis (inflammation of the gall bladder), and in rare cases, respiratory illness.228 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.33 (credit “Ascomycota”: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, Centers for Disease Control andPrevention; credit “Microsporidia”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 229• Which group of fungi appears to be associated with the greatest number of human diseases?Eukaryotic Pathogens in Eukaryotic HostsWhen we think about antimicrobial medications, antibiotics such as penicillin often come to mind. Penicillinand related antibiotics interfere with the synthesis of peptidoglycan cell walls, which effectively targets bacterialcells. These antibiotics are useful because humans (like all eukaryotes) do not have peptidoglycan cell walls.Developing medications that are effective against eukaryotic cells but not harmful to human cells is moredifficult. Despite huge morphological differences, the cells of humans, fungi, and protists are similar in terms oftheir ribosomes, cytoskeletons, and cell membranes. As a result, it is more challenging to develop medicationsthat target protozoans and fungi in the same way that antibiotics target prokaryotes.Fungicides have relatively limited modes of action. Because fungi have ergosterols (instead of cholesterol) intheir cell membranes, the different enzymes involved in sterol production can be a target of some medications.The azole and morpholine fungicides interfere with the synthesis of membrane sterols. These are used widelyin agriculture (fenpropimorph) and clinically (e.g., miconazole). Some antifungal medications target the chitincell walls of fungi. Despite the success of these compounds in targeting fungi, antifungal medications forsystemic infections still tend to have more toxic side effects than antibiotics for bacteria.Part 3Sarah is relieved the ringworm is not an actual worm, but wants to know what it really is. The physician explainsthat ringworm is a fungus. He tells her that she will not see mushrooms popping out of her skin, because thisfungus is more like the invisible part of a mushroom that hides in the soil. He reassures her that they are goingto get the fungus out of her too.The doctor cleans and then carefully scrapes the lesion to place a specimen on a slide. By looking at it under amicroscope, the physician is able to confirm that a fungal infection is responsible for Sarah’s lesion. In Figure5.34, it is possible to see macro- and microconidia in Trichophyton rubrum. Cell walls are also visible. Evenif the pathogen resembled a helminth under the microscope, the presence of cell walls would rule out thepossibility because animal cells lack cell walls.The doctor prescribes an antifungal cream for Sarah’s mother to apply to the ringworm. Sarah’s mother asks,“What should we do if it doesn’t go away?”• Can all forms of ringworm be treated with the same antifungal medication?Micro ConnectionsClinical Focus230 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.34 This micrograph shows hyphae (macroconidium) and microconidia of Trichophyton rubrum, adermatophyte responsible for fungal infections of the skin. (credit: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.5.4 AlgaeLearning Objectives• Explain why algae are included within the discipline of microbiology• Describe the unique characteristics of algae• Identify examples of toxin-producing algae• Compare the major groups of algae in this chapter, and give examples of each• Classify algal organisms according to major groupsThe algae are autotrophic protists that can be unicellular or multicellular. These organisms are found in thesupergroups Chromalveolata (dinoflagellates, diatoms, golden algae, and brown algae) and Archaeplastida (redalgae and green algae). They are important ecologically and environmentally because they are responsible for theproduction of approximately 70% of the oxygen and organic matter in aquatic environments. Some types of algae,even those that are microscopic, are regularly eaten by humans and other animals. Additionally, algae are the sourcefor agar, agarose, and carrageenan, solidifying agents used in laboratories and in food production. Although algaeare typically not pathogenic, some produce toxins. Harmful algal blooms, which occur when algae grow quickly andproduce dense populations, can produce high concentrations of toxins that impair liver and nervous-system functionin aquatic animals and humans.Like protozoans, algae often have complex cell structures. For instance, algal cells can have one or more chloroplaststhat contain structures called pyrenoids to synthesize and store starch. The chloroplasts themselves differ in theirnumber of membranes, indicative of secondary or rare tertiary endosymbiotic events. Primary chloroplasts havetwo membranes—one from the original cyanobacteria that the ancestral eukaryotic cell engulfed, and one fromthe plasma membrane of the engulfing cell. Chloroplasts in some lineages appear to have resulted from secondaryendosymbiosis, in which another cell engulfed a green or red algal cell that already had a primary chloroplast withinit. The engulfing cell destroyed everything except the chloroplast and possibly the cell membrane of its original cell,leaving three or four membranes around the chloroplast. Different algal groups have different pigments, which areChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 231reflected in common names such as red algae, brown algae, and green algae.Some algae, the seaweeds, are macroscopic and may be confused with plants. Seaweeds can be red, brown, or green,depending on their photosynthetic pigments. Green algae, in particular, share some important similarities with landplants; however, there are also important distinctions. For example, seaweeds do not have true tissues or organs likeplants do. Additionally, seaweeds do not have a waxy cuticle to prevent desiccation. Algae can also be confused withcyanobacteria, photosynthetic bacteria that bear a resemblance to algae; however, cyanobacteria are prokaryotes (seeNonproteobacteria Gram-negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria).Algae have a variety of life cycles. Reproduction may be asexual by mitosis or sexual using gametes.Algal DiversityAlthough the algae and protozoa were formerly separated taxonomically, they are now mixed into supergroups.The algae are classified within the Chromalveolata and the Archaeplastida. Although the Euglenozoa (within thesupergroup Excavata) include photosynthetic organisms, these are not considered algae because they feed and aremotile.The dinoflagellates and stramenopiles fall within the Chromalveolata. The dinoflagellates are mostly marineorganisms and are an important component of plankton. They have a variety of nutritional types and may bephototrophic, heterotrophic, or mixotrophic. Those that are photosynthetic use chlorophyll a, chlorophyll c2, andother photosynthetic pigments (Figure 5.35). They generally have two flagella, causing them to whirl (in fact,the name dinoflagellate comes from the Greek word for “whirl”: dini). Some have cellulose plates forming a hardouter covering, or theca, as armor. Additionally, some dinoflagellates produce neurotoxins that can cause paralysis inhumans or fish. Exposure can occur through contact with water containing the dinoflagellate toxins or by feeding onorganisms that have eaten dinoflagellates.When a population of dinoflagellates becomes particularly dense, a red tide (a type of harmful algal bloom) canoccur. Red tides cause harm to marine life and to humans who consume contaminated marine life. Major toxinproducers include Gonyaulax and Alexandrium, both of which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning. Another species,Pfiesteria piscicida, is known as a fish killer because, at certain parts of its life cycle, it can produce toxins harmfulto fish and it appears to be responsible for a suite of symptoms, including memory loss and confusion, in humansexposed to water containing the species.Figure 5.35 The dinoflagellates exhibit great diversity in shape. Many are encased in cellulose armor and have twoflagella that fit in grooves between the plates. Movement of these two perpendicular flagella causes a spinningmotion. (credit: modification of work by CSIRO)The stramenopiles include the golden algae (Chrysophyta), the brown algae (Phaeophyta), and the diatoms(Bacillariophyta). Stramenopiles have chlorophyll a, chlorophyll c1/c2, and fucoxanthin as photosynthetic pigments.Their storage carbohydrate is chrysolaminarin. While some lack cell walls, others have scales. Diatoms have232 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5flagella and frustules, which are outer cell walls of crystallized silica; their fossilized remains are used to producediatomaceous earth, which has a range of uses such as filtration and insulation. Additionally, diatoms can reproducesexually or asexually. One diatom genus, Pseudo-nitzschia, is known to be associated with harmful algal blooms.Brown algae (Phaeophyta) are multicellular marine seaweeds. Some can be extremely large, such as the giant kelp(Laminaria). They have leaf-like blades, stalks, and structures called holdfasts that are used to attach to substrate.However, these are not true leaves, stems, or roots (Figure 5.36). Their photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a,chlorophyll c, β-carotene, and fucoxanthine. They use laminarin as a storage carbohydrate.The Archaeplastids include the green algae (Chlorophyta), the red algae (Rhodophyta), another group of green algae(Charophyta), and the land plants. The Charaphyta are the most similar to land plants because they share a mechanismof cell division and an important biochemical pathway, among other traits that the other groups do not have. Like landplants, the Charophyta and Chlorophyta have chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b as photosynthetic pigments, cellulosecell walls, and starch as a carbohydrate storage molecule. Chlamydomonas is a green alga that has a single largechloroplast, two flagella, and a stigma (eyespot); it is important in molecular biology research (Figure 5.37).Chlorella is a nonmotile, large, unicellular alga, and Acetabularia is an even larger unicellular green alga. The size ofthese organisms challenges the idea that all cells are small, and they have been used in genetics research since JoachimHämmerling (1901–1980) began to work with them in 1943. Volvox is a colonial, unicellular alga (Figure 5.37).A larger, multicellular green alga is Ulva, also known as the sea lettuce because of its large, edible, green blades.The range of life forms within the Chlorophyta—from unicellular to various levels of coloniality to multicellularforms—has been a useful research model for understanding the evolution of multicellularity. The red algae are mainlymulticellular but include some unicellular forms. They have rigid cell walls containing agar or carrageenan, whichare useful as food solidifying agents and as a solidifier added to growth media for microbes.Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 233Figure 5.36 (a) These large multicellular kelps are members of the brown algae. Note the “leaves” and “stems” thatmake them appear similar to green plants. (b) This is a species of red algae that is also multicellular. (c) The greenalga Halimeda incrassata, shown here growing on the sea floor in shallow water, appears to have plant-likestructures, but is not a true plant. (d) Bioluminesence, visible in the cresting wave in this picture, is a phenomenon ofcertain dinoflagellates. (e) Diatoms (pictured in this micrograph) produce silicaceous tests (skeletons) that formdiatomaceous earths. (f) Colonial green algae, like volvox in these three micrographs, exhibit simple cooperativeassociations of cells. (credit a, e: modification of work by NOAA; credit b: modification of work by Ed Bierman; creditc: modification of work by James St. John; credit d: modification of work by “catalano82”/Flickr; credit f: modificationof work by Dr. Ralf Wagner)234 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.37 Chlamydomonas is a unicellular green alga.• Which groups of algae are associated with harmful algal blooms?5.5 LichensLearning Objectives• Explain why lichens are included in the study of microbiology• Describe the unique characteristics of a lichen and the role of each partner in the symbiotic relationship of alichen• Describe ways in which lichens are beneficial to the environmentNo one has to worry about getting sick from a lichen infection, but lichens are interesting from a microbiologicalperspective and they are an important component of most terrestrial ecosystems. Lichens provide opportunities forstudy of close relationships between unrelated microorganisms. Lichens contribute to soil production by breakingdown rock, and they are early colonizers in soilless environments such as lava flows. The cyanobacteria in somelichens can fix nitrogen and act as a nitrogen source in some environments. Lichens are also important soil stabilizersin some desert environments and they are an important winter food source for caribou and reindeer. Finally, lichensproduce compounds that have antibacterial effects, and further research may discover compounds that are medicallyuseful to humans.CharacteristicsA lichen is a combination of two organisms, a green alga or cyanobacterium and an ascomycete fungus, living ina symbiotic relationship. Whereas algae normally grow only in aquatic or extremely moist environments, lichenscan potentially be found on almost any surface (especially rocks) or as epiphytes (meaning that they grow on otherplants).In some ways, the symbiotic relationship between lichens and algae seems like a mutualism (a relationship in whichboth organisms benefit). The fungus can obtain photosynthates from the algae or cyanobacterium and the algae orChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 235cyanobacterium can grow in a drier environment than it could otherwise tolerate. However, most scientists considerthis symbiotic relationship to be a controlled parasitism (a relationship in which one organism benefits and the otheris harmed) because the photosynthetic organism grows less well than it would without the fungus. It is important tonote that such symbiotic interactions fall along a continuum between conflict and cooperation.Lichens are slow growing and can live for centuries. They have been used in foods and to extract chemicals as dyesor antimicrobial substances. Some are very sensitive to pollution and have been used as environmental indicators.Lichens have a body called a thallus, an outer, tightly packed fungal layer called a cortex, and an inner, loosely packedfungal layer called a medulla (Figure 5.38). Lichens use hyphal bundles called rhizines to attach to the substrate.Figure 5.38 This cross-section of a lichen thallus shows its various components. The upper cortex of fungal hyphaeprovides protection. Photosynthesis occurs in the algal zone. The medulla consists of fungal hyphae. The lowercortex also provides protection. The rhizines anchor the thallus to the substrate.Lichen DiversityLichens are classified as fungi and the fungal partners belong to the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. Lichens can alsobe grouped into types based on their morphology. There are three major types of lichens, although other types exist aswell. Lichens that are tightly attached to the substrate, giving them a crusty appearance, are called crustose lichens.Those that have leaf-like lobes are foliose lichens; they may only be attached at one point in the growth form, andthey also have a second cortex below the medulla. Finally, fruticose lichens have rounded structures and an overallbranched appearance. Figure 5.39 shows an example of each of the forms of lichens.236 Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of MicrobiologyThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 5.39 Examples of the three types of lichens are shown here. (a) This is a crustose lichen found mostly onmarine rocks, Caloplaca marina. (b) This is a foliose lichen, Flavoparmelia caperata. (c) This is a fruticose lichen,Letharia vulpina, which is sufficiently poisonous that it was once used to make arrowheads. (credit b, c: modificationof work by Jason Hollinger)• What types of organisms are found in lichens?• What are the three growth forms of lichens?ResolutionSarah’s mother asks the doctor what she should do if the cream prescribed for Sarah’s ringworm does notwork. The doctor explains that ringworm is a general term for a condition caused by multiple species. Thefirst step is to take a scraping for examination under the microscope, which the doctor has already done. Heexplains that he has identified the infection as a fungus, and that the antifungal cream works against the mostcommon fungi associated with ringworm. However, the cream may not work against some species of fungus.If the cream is not working after a couple of weeks, Sarah should come in for another visit, at which time thedoctor will take steps to identify the species of the fungus.Positive identification of dermatophytes requires culturing. For this purpose, Sabouraud’s agar may be used. Inthe case of Sarah’s infection, which cleared up within 2 weeks of treatment, the culture would have a granulartexture and would appear pale pink on top and red underneath. These features suggest that the fungus isTrichophyton rubrum, a common cause of ringworm.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Summary5.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic Parasites• Protists are a diverse, polyphyletic group of eukaryotic organisms.• Protists may be unicellular or multicellular. They vary in how they get their nutrition, morphology, method oflocomotion, and mode of reproduction.Clinical FocusChapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology 237• Important structures of protists include contractile vacuoles, cilia, flagella, pellicles, and pseudopodia; somelack organelles such as mitochondria.• Taxonomy of protists is changing rapidly as relationships are reassessed using newer techniques.• The protists include important pathogens and parasites.5.2 Parasitic Helminths• Helminth parasites are included within the study of microbiology because they are often identified by lookingfor microscopic eggs and larvae.• The two major groups of helminth parasites are the roundworms (Nematoda) and the flatworms(Platyhelminthes).• Nematodes are common intestinal parasites often transmitted through undercooked foods, although they arealso found in other environments.• Platyhelminths include tapeworms and flukes, which are often transmitted through undercooked meat.5.3 Fungi• The fungi include diverse saprotrophic eukaryotic organisms with chitin cell walls• Fungi can be unicellular or multicellular; some (like yeast) and fungal spores are microscopic, whereas someare large and conspicuous• Reproductive types are important in distinguishing fungal groups• Medically important species exist in the four fungal groups Zygomycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, andMicrosporidia• Members of Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota produce deadly toxins• Important differences in fungal cells, such as ergosterols in fungal membranes, can be targets for antifungalmedications, but similarities between human and fungal cells make it difficult to find targets for medicationsand these medications often have toxic adverse effects5.4 Algae• Algae are a diverse group of photosynthetic eukaryotic protists• Algae may be unicellular or multicellular• Large, multicellular algae are called seaweeds but are not plants and lack plant-like tissues and organs• Although algae have little pathogenicity, they may be associated with toxic algal blooms that can and aquaticwildlife and contaminate seafood with toxins that cause paralysis• Algae are important for producing agar, which is used as a solidifying agent in microbiological media, andcarrageenan, which is used as a solidifying agent5.5 Lichens• Lichens are a symbiotic association between a fungus and an algae or a cyanobacterium• The symbiotic association found in lichens is currently considered to be a controlled parasitism, in which thefungus benefits and the algae or cyanobacterium is harmed• Lichens are slow growing and can live for centuries in a variety of habitats• Lichens are environmentally important, helping to create soil, providing food, and acting as indicators of air pollution.