Chapter 21Skin and Eye InfectionsFigure 21.1 The skin is an important barrier to pathogens, but it can also develop infections. These raised lesions(left) are typical of folliculitis, a condition that results from the inflammation of hair follicles. Acne lesions (right) alsoresult from inflammation of hair follicles. In this case, the inflammation results when hair follicles become clogged withcomplex lipids, fatty acids, and dead skin cells, producing a favorable environment for bacteria.Chapter Outline21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin and Eyes21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes21.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes21.4 Mycoses of the Skin21.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin and EyesIntroductionThe human body is covered in skin, and like most coverings, skin is designed to protect what is underneath. One of itsprimary purposes is to prevent microbes in the surrounding environment from invading underlying tissues and organs.But in spite of its role as a protective covering, skin is not itself immune from infection. Certain pathogens and toxinscan cause severe infections or reactions when they come in contact with the skin. Other pathogens are opportunistic,breaching the skin’s natural defenses through cuts, wounds, or a disruption of normal microbiota resulting in aninfection in the surrounding skin and tissue. Still other pathogens enter the body via different routes—through therespiratory or digestive systems, for example—but cause reactions that manifest as skin rashes or lesions.Nearly all humans experience skin infections to some degree. Many of these conditions are, as the name suggests,“skin deep,” with symptoms that are local and non-life-threatening. At some point, almost everyone must endureconditions like acne, athlete’s foot, and minor infections of cuts and abrasions, all of which result from infections ofthe skin. But not all skin infections are quite so innocuous. Some can become invasive, leading to systemic infectionor spreading over large areas of skin, potentially becoming life-threatening.21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin andChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 913EyesLearning Objectives• Describe the major anatomical features of the skin and eyes• Compare and contrast the microbiomes of various body sites, such as the hands, back, feet, and eyes• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of skin and eyes in order to cause infection• Describe general signs and symptoms of disease associated with infections of the skin and eyesHuman skin is an important part of the innate immune system. In addition to serving a wide range of other functions,the skin serves as an important barrier to microbial invasion. Not only is it a physical barrier to penetration of deepertissues by potential pathogens, but it also provides an inhospitable environment for the growth of many pathogens. Inthis section, we will provide a brief overview of the anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and eyes, along withgeneral symptoms associated with skin and eye infections.Layers of the SkinHuman skin is made up of several layers and sublayers. The two main layers are the epidermis and the dermis. Theselayers cover a third layer of tissue called the hypodermis, which consists of fibrous and adipose connective tissue(Figure 21.2).The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin, and it is relatively thin. The exterior surface of the epidermis, calledthe stratum corneum, primarily consists of dead skin cells. This layer of dead cells limits direct contact between theoutside world and live cells. The stratum corneum is rich in keratin, a tough, fibrous protein that is also found in hairand nails. Keratin helps make the outer surface of the skin relatively tough and waterproof. It also helps to keep thesurface of the skin dry, which reduces microbial growth. However, some microbes are still able to live on the surfaceof the skin, and some of these can be shed with dead skin cells in the process of desquamation, which is the sheddingand peeling of skin that occurs as a normal process but that may be accelerated when infection is present.Beneath the epidermis lies a thicker skin layer called the dermis. The dermis contains connective tissue and embeddedstructures such as blood vessels, nerves, and muscles. Structures called hair follicles (from which hair grows) arelocated within the dermis, even though much of their structure consists of epidermal tissue. The dermis also containsthe two major types of glands found in human skin: sweat glands (tubular glands that produce sweat) and sebaceousglands (which are associated with hair follicles and produce sebum, a lipid-rich substance containing proteins andminerals).Perspiration (sweat) provides some moisture to the epidermis, which can increase the potential for microbial growth.For this reason, more microbes are found on the regions of the skin that produce the most sweat, such as the skinPart 1Sam, a college freshman with a bad habit of oversleeping, nicked himself shaving in a rush to get to class ontime. At the time, he didn’t think twice about it. But two days later, he noticed the cut was surrounded by areddish area of skin that was warm to the touch. When the wound started oozing pus, he decided he had betterstop by the university’s clinic. The doctor took a sample from the lesion and then cleaned the area.• What type of microbe could be responsible for Sam’s infection?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.Clinical Focus914 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5of the underarms and groin. However, in addition to water, sweat also contains substances that inhibit microbialgrowth, such as salts, lysozyme, and antimicrobial peptides. Sebum also serves to protect the skin and reduce waterloss. Although some of the lipids and fatty acids in sebum inhibit microbial growth, sebum contains compounds thatprovide nutrition for certain microbes.Figure 21.2 (a) A micrograph of a section through human skin shows the epidermis and dermis. (b) The majorlayers of human skin are the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis. (credit b: modification of work by National CancerInstitute)• How does desquamation help with preventing infections?Normal Microbiota of the SkinThe skin is home to a wide variety of normal microbiota, consisting of commensal organisms that derive nutritionfrom skin cells and secretions such as sweat and sebum. The normal microbiota of skin tends to inhibit transientmicrobecolonization by producing antimicrobial substances and outcompeting other microbes that land on the surfaceof the skin. This helps to protect the skin from pathogenic infection.The skin’s properties differ from one region of the body to another, as does the composition of the skin’s microbiota.The availability of nutrients and moisture partly dictates which microorganisms will thrive in a particular region of theskin. Relatively moist skin, such as that of the nares (nostrils) and underarms, has a much different microbiota thanthe dryer skin on the arms, legs, hands, and top of the feet. Some areas of the skin have higher densities of sebaceousglands. These sebum-rich areas, which include the back, the folds at the side of the nose, and the back of the neck,harbor distinct microbial communities that are less diverse than those found on other parts of the body.Different types of bacteria dominate the dry, moist, and sebum-rich regions of the skin. The most abundant microbestypically found in the dry and sebaceous regions are Betaproteobacteria and Propionibacteria, respectively. In theChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 915moist regions, Corynebacterium and Staphylococcus are most commonly found (Figure 21.3). Viruses and fungiare also found on the skin, with Malassezia being the most common type of fungus found as part of the normalmicrobiota. The role and populations of viruses in the microbiota, known as viromes, are still not well understood,and there are limitations to the techniques used to identify them. However, Circoviridae, Papillomaviridae, andPolyomaviridae appear to be the most common residents in the healthy skin virome.[1][2][3]Figure 21.3 The normal microbiota varies on different regions of the skin, especially in dry versus moist areas. Thefigure shows the major organisms commonly found in different locations of a healthy individual’s skin and externalmucosa. Note that there is significant variation among individuals. (credit: modification of work by National HumanGenome Research Institute)• What are the four most common bacteria that are part of the normal skin microbiota?Infections of the SkinWhile the microbiota of the skin can play a protective role, it can also cause harm in certain cases. Often, anopportunistic pathogen residing in the skin microbiota of one individual may be transmitted to another individualmore susceptible to an infection. For example, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) can often take up1. Belkaid, Y., and J.A. Segre. “Dialogue Between Skin Microbiota and Immunity,” Science 346 (2014) 6212:954–959.2. Foulongne, Vincent, et al. “Human Skin Microbiota: High Diversity of DNA Viruses Identified on the Human Skin by High ThroughputSequencing.” PLoS ONE (2012) 7(6): e38499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038499.3. Robinson, C.M., and J.K. Pfeiffer. “Viruses and the Microbiota.” Annual Review of Virology (2014) 1:55–59. doi: 10.1146/annurevvirology-031413-085550.916 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5residence in the nares of health care workers and hospital patients; though harmless on intact, healthy skin, MRSAcan cause infections if introduced into other parts of the body, as might occur during surgery or via a post-surgicalincision or wound. This is one reason why clean surgical sites are so important.Injury or damage to the skin can allow microbes to enter deeper tissues, where nutrients are more abundant and theenvironment is more conducive to bacterial growth. Wound infections are common after a puncture or laceration thatdamages the physical barrier of the skin. Microbes may infect structures in the dermis, such as hair follicles andglands, causing a localized infection, or they may reach the bloodstream, which can lead to a systemic infection.In some cases, infectious microbes can cause a variety of rashes or lesions that differ in their physical characteristics.These rashes can be the result of inflammation reactions or direct responses to toxins produced by the microbes.Table 21.1 lists some of the medical terminology used to describe skin lesions and rashes based on theircharacteristics; Figure 21.4 and Figure 21.5 illustrate some of the various types of skin lesions. It is important tonote that many different diseases can lead to skin conditions of very similar appearance; thus the terms used in thetable are generally not exclusive to a particular type of infection or disease.Some Medical Terms Associated with Skin Lesions and RashesTerm Definitionabscess localized collection of pusbulla (pl.,bullae)fluid-filled blister no more than 5 mm in diametercarbuncle deep, pus-filled abscess generally formed from multiple furunclescrust dried fluids from a lesion on the surface of the skincyst encapsulated sac filled with fluid, semi-solid matter, or gas, typically located just below theupper layers of skinfolliculitis a localized rash due to inflammation of hair folliclesfuruncle (boil) pus-filled abscess due to infection of a hair folliclemacules smooth spots of discoloration on the skinpapules small raised bumps on the skinpseudocyst lesion that resembles a cyst but with a less defined boundarypurulent pus-producing; suppurativepustules fluid- or pus-filled bumps on the skinpyoderma any suppurative (pus-producing) infection of the skinsuppurative producing pus; purulentulcer break in the skin; open sorevesicle small, fluid-filled lesionwheal swollen, inflamed skin that itches or burns, such as from an insect biteTable 21.1Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 917Figure 21.4 (a) Acne is a bacterial infection of the skin that manifests as a rash of inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis).The large whitehead near the center of the cheek is an infected hair follicle that has become purulent (orsuppurative), leading to the formation of a furuncle. (b) An abscess is a pus-filled lesion. (credit b: modification ofwork by Bruce Blaus)Figure 21.5 Numerous causes can lead to skin lesions of various types, some of which are very similar inappearance. (credit: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)• How can asymptomatic health care workers transmit bacteria such as MRSA to patients?Anatomy and Microbiota of the EyeAlthough the eye and skin have distinct anatomy, they are both in direct contact with the external environment. Animportant component of the eye is the nasolacrimal drainage system, which serves as a conduit for the fluid of theeye, called tears. Tears flow from the external eye to the nasal cavity by the lacrimal apparatus, which is composed of918 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5the structures involved in tear production (Figure 21.6). The lacrimal gland, above the eye, secretes tears to keepthe eye moist. There are two small openings, one on the inside edge of the upper eyelid and one on the inside edge ofthe lower eyelid, near the nose. Each of these openings is called a lacrimal punctum. Together, these lacrimal punctacollect tears from the eye that are then conveyed through lacrimal ducts to a reservoir for tears called the lacrimalsac, also known as the dacrocyst or tear sac.From the sac, tear fluid flows via a nasolacrimal duct to the inner nose. Each nasolacrimal duct is located underneaththe skin and passes through the bones of the face into the nose. Chemicals in tears, such as defensins, lactoferrin,and lysozyme, help to prevent colonization by pathogens. In addition, mucins facilitate removal of microbes from thesurface of the eye.Figure 21.6 The lacrimal apparatus includes the structures of the eye associated with tear production and drainage.(credit: modification of work by “Evidence Based Medical Educator Inc.”/YouTube)The surfaces of the eyeball and inner eyelid are mucous membranes called conjunctiva. The normal conjunctivalmicrobiota has not been well characterized, but does exist. One small study (part of the Ocular Microbiome project)found twelve genera that were consistently present in the conjunctiva.[4] These microbes are thought to help defendthe membranes against pathogens. However, it is still unclear which microbes may be transient and which may forma stable microbiota.[5]Use of contact lenses can cause changes in the normal microbiota of the conjunctiva by introducing another surfaceinto the natural anatomy of the eye. Research is currently underway to better understand how contact lenses mayimpact the normal microbiota and contribute to eye disease.The watery material inside of the eyeball is called the vitreous humor. Unlike the conjunctiva, it is protected fromcontact with the environment and is almost always sterile, with no normal microbiota (Figure 21.7).4. Abelson, M.B., Lane, K., and Slocum, C.. “The Secrets of Ocular Microbiomes.” Review of Ophthalmology June 8, 2015.http://www.reviewofophthalmology.com/content/t/ocular_disease/c/55178. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.5. Shaikh-Lesko, R. “Visualizing the Ocular Microbiome.” The Scientist May 12, 2014. http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/39945/title/Visualizing-the-Ocular-Microbiome. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 919Figure 21.7 Some microbes live on the conjunctiva of the human eye, but the vitreous humor is sterile.Infections of the EyeThe conjunctiva is a frequent site of infection of the eye; like other mucous membranes, it is also a commonportal of entry for pathogens. Inflammation of the conjunctiva is called conjunctivitis, although it is commonlyknown as pinkeye because of the pink appearance in the eye. Infections of deeper structures, beneath the cornea, areless common (Figure 21.8). Conjunctivitis occurs in multiple forms. It may be acute or chronic. Acute purulentconjunctivitis is associated with pus formation, while acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is associated with bleedingin the conjunctiva. The term blepharitis refers to an inflammation of the eyelids, while keratitis refers to aninflammation of the cornea (Figure 21.8); keratoconjunctivitis is an inflammation of both the cornea and theconjunctiva, and dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the lacrimal sac that can often occur when a nasolacrimal ductis blocked.Figure 21.8 (a) Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva. (b) Blepharitis is inflammation of the eyelids. (c)Keratitis is inflammation of the cornea. (credit a: modification of work by Lopez-Prats MJ, Sanz Marco E, Hidalgo-Mora JJ, Garcia-Delpech S, Diaz-Llopis M; credit b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control andPrevention)Infections leading to conjunctivitis, blepharitis, keratoconjunctivitis, or dacryocystitis may be caused by bacteria orviruses, but allergens, pollutants, or chemicals can also irritate the eye and cause inflammation of various structures.Viral infection is a more likely cause of conjunctivitis in cases with symptoms such as fever and watery discharge thatoccurs with upper respiratory infection and itchy eyes. Table 21.2 summarizes some common forms of conjunctivitisand blepharitis.920 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Types of Conjunctivities and BlepharitisCondition Description Causative Agent(s)Acute purulentconjunctivitisConjunctivitis with purulent discharge Bacterial (Haemophilus,Staphylococcus)Acute hemorrhagicconjunctivitisInvolves subconjunctival hemorrhages Viral (Picornaviradae)Acute ulcerativeblepharitisInfection involving eyelids; pustules and ulcers maydevelopBacterial (Staphylococcal) or viral(herpes simplex, varicella-zoster,etc.)FollicularconjunctivitisInflammation of the conjunctiva with nodules(dome-shaped structures that are red at the baseand pale on top)Viral (adenovirus and others);environmental irritantsDacryocystitis Inflammation of the lacrimal sac often associatedwith a plugged nasolacrimal ductBacterial (Haemophilus,Staphylococcus, Streptococcus)Keratitis Inflammation of cornea Bacterial, viral, or protozoal;environmental irritantsKeratoconjunctivitis Inflammation of cornea and conjunctiva Bacterial, viral (adenoviruses), orother causes (including dryness ofthe eye)NonulcerativeblepharitisInflammation, irritation, redness of the eyelidswithout ulcerationEnvironmental irritants; allergensPapillaryconjunctivitisInflammation of the conjunctiva; nodules andpapillae with red tops developEnvironmental irritants; allergensTable 21.2• How does the lacrimal apparatus help to prevent eye infections?21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and EyesLearning Objectives• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that cause infections of the skin and eyes• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the skin and eyesDespite the skin’s protective functions, infections are common. Gram-positive Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcusspp. are responsible for many of the most common skin infections. However, many skin conditions are not strictlyassociated with a single pathogen. Opportunistic pathogens of many types may infect skin wounds, and individualcases with identical symptoms may result from different pathogens or combinations of pathogens.In this section, we will examine some of the most important bacterial infections of the skin and eyes and discuss howbiofilms can contribute to and exacerbate such infections. Key features of bacterial skin and eye infections are alsosummarized in the Disease Profile boxes throughout this section.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 921Staphylococcal Infections of the SkinStaphylococcus species are commonly found on the skin, with S. epidermidis and S. hominis being prevalent in thenormal microbiota. S. aureus is also commonly found in the nasal passages and on healthy skin, but pathogenic strainsare often the cause of a broad range of infections of the skin and other body systems.S. aureus is quite contagious. It is spread easily through skin-to-skin contact, and because many people are chronicnasal carriers (asymptomatic individuals who carry S. aureus in their nares), the bacteria can easily be transferredfrom the nose to the hands and then to fomites or other individuals. Because it is so contagious, S. aureus isprevalent in most community settings. This prevalence is particularly problematic in hospitals, where antibioticresistantstrains of the bacteria may be present, and where immunocompromised patients may be more susceptibleto infection. Resistant strains include methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), which can be acquired through healthcaresettings (hospital-acquired MRSA, or HA-MRSA) or in the community (community-acquired MRSA, or CAMRSA).Hospital patients often arrive at health-care facilities already colonized with antibiotic-resistant strains of S.aureus that can be transferred to health-care providers and other patients. Some hospitals have attempted to detectthese individuals in order to institute prophylactic measures, but they have had mixed success (see Eye on Ethics:Screening Patients for MRSA).When a staphylococcal infection develops, choice of medication is important. As discussed above, manystaphylococci (such as MRSA) are resistant to some or many antibiotics. Thus, antibiotic sensitivity is measured toidentify the most suitable antibiotic. However, even before receiving the results of sensitivity analysis, suspected S.aureus infections are often initially treated with drugs known to be effective against MRSA, such as trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole(TMP/SMZ), clindamycin, a tetracycline (doxycycline or minocycline), or linezolid.The pathogenicity of staphylococcal infections is often enhanced by characteristic chemicals secreted by some strains.Staphylococcal virulence factors include hemolysins called staphylolysins, which are cytotoxic for many types ofcells, including skin cells and white blood cells. Virulent strains of S. aureus are also coagulase-positive, meaningthey produce coagulase, a plasma-clotting protein that is involved in abscess formation. They may also produceleukocidins, which kill white blood cells and can contribute to the production of pus and Protein A, which inhibitsphagocytosis by binding to the constant region of antibodies. Some virulent strains of S. aureus also produce othertoxins, such as toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens).To confirm the causative agent of a suspected staphylococcal skin infection, samples from the wound are cultured.Under the microscope, gram-positive Staphylococcus species have cellular arrangements that form grapelike clusters;when grown on blood agar, colonies have a unique pigmentation ranging from opaque white to cream. A catalasetest is used to distinguish Staphylococcus from Streptococcus, which is also a genus of gram-positive cocci anda common cause of skin infections. Staphylococcus species are catalase-positive while Streptococcus species arecatalase-negative.Other tests are performed on samples from the wound in order to distinguish coagulase-positive species ofStaphylococcus (CoPS) such as S. aureus from common coagulase-negative species (CoNS) such as S. epidermidis.Although CoNS are less likely than CoPS to cause human disease, they can cause infections when they enter thebody, as can sometimes occur via catheters, indwelling medical devices, and wounds. Passive agglutination testingcan be used to distinguish CoPS from CoNS. If the sample is coagulase-positive, the sample is generally presumed tocontain S. aureus. Additional genetic testing would be necessary to identify the particular strain of S. aureus.Another way to distinguish CoPS from CoNS is by culturing the sample on mannitol salt agar (MSA). Staphylococcusspecies readily grow on this medium because they are tolerant of the high concentration of sodium chloride (7.5%NaCl). However, CoPS such as S. aureus ferment mannitol (which will be evident on a MSA plate), whereas CoNSsuch as S. epidermidis do not ferment mannitol but can be distinguished by the fermentation of other sugars such aslactose, malonate, and raffinose (Figure 21.9).922 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 21.9 (a) A mannitol salt agar plate is used to distinguish different species of staphylococci. In this plate, S.aureus is on the left and S. epidermidis is in the right. Because S. aureus is capable of fermenting mannitol, itproduces acids that cause the color to change to yellow. (b) This scanning electron micrograph shows thecharacteristic grapelike clusters of S. aureus. (credit a: modification of work by “ScienceProfOnline”/YouTube; creditb: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Screening Patients for MRSAAccording to the CDC, 86% of invasive MRSA infections are associated in some way with healthcare, asopposed to being community-acquired. In hospitals and clinics, asymptomatic patients who harbor MRSA mayspread the bacteria to individuals who are more susceptible to serious illness.In an attempt to control the spread of MRSA, hospitals have tried screening patients for MRSA. If patientstest positive following a nasal swab test, they can undergo decolonization using chlorhexidine washesor intranasal mupirocin. Some studies have reported substantial reductions in MRSA disease followingimplementation of these protocols, while others have not. This is partly because there is no standard protocolfor these procedures. Several different MRSA identification tests may be used, some involving slower culturingtechniques and others rapid testing. Other factors, such as the effectiveness of general hand-washingprotocols, may also play a role in helping to prevent MRSA transmission. There are still other questions thatneed to be addressed: How frequently should patients be screened? Which individuals should be tested? Fromwhere on the body should samples be collected? Will increased resistance develop from the decolonizationprocedures?Even if identification and decolonization procedures are perfected, ethical questions will remain. Shouldpatients have the right to decline testing? Should a patient who tests positive for MRSA have the right to declinethe decolonization procedure, and if so, should hospitals have the right to refuse treatment to the patient? Howdo we balance the individual’s right to receive care with the rights of other patients who could be exposed todisease as a result?Superficial Staphylococcal InfectionsS. aureus is often associated with pyoderma, skin infections that are purulent. Pus formation occurs because manyEye on EthicsChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 923strains of S. aureus produce leukocidins, which kill white blood cells. These purulent skin infections may initiallymanifest as folliculitis, but can lead to furuncles or deeper abscesses called carbuncles.Folliculitis generally presents as bumps and pimples that may be itchy, red, and/or pus-filled. In some cases,folliculitis is self-limiting, but if it continues for more than a few days, worsens, or returns repeatedly, it may requiremedical treatment. Sweat, skin injuries, ingrown hairs, tight clothing, irritation from shaving, and skin conditions canall contribute to folliculitis. Avoidance of tight clothing and skin irritation can help to prevent infection, but topicalantibiotics (and sometimes other treatments) may also help. Folliculitis can be identified by skin inspection; treatmentis generally started without first culturing and identifying the causative agent.In contrast, furuncles (boils) are deeper infections (Figure 21.10). They are most common in those individuals(especially young adults and teenagers) who play contact sports, share athletic equipment, have poor nutrition, live inclose quarters, or have weakened immune systems. Good hygiene and skin care can often help to prevent furunclesfrom becoming more infective, and they generally resolve on their own. However, if furuncles spread, increase innumber or size, or lead to systemic symptoms such as fever and chills, then medical care is needed. They maysometimes need to be drained (at which time the pathogens can be cultured) and treated with antibiotics.When multiple boils develop into a deeper lesion, it is called a carbuncle (Figure 21.10). Because carbunclesare deeper, they are more commonly associated with systemic symptoms and a general feeling of illness. Larger,recurrent, or worsening carbuncles require medical treatment, as do those associated with signs of illness such asfever. Carbuncles generally need to be drained and treated with antibiotics. While carbuncles are relatively easy toidentify visually, culturing and laboratory analysis of the wound may be recommended for some infections becauseantibiotic resistance is relatively common.Proper hygiene is important to prevent these types of skin infections or to prevent the progression of existinginfections.Figure 21.10 Furuncles (boils) and carbuncles are infections of the skin often caused by Staphylococcus bacteria.(a) A furuncle contains pus and exhibits swelling. (b) A carbuncle is a pus-filled lesion that is typically deeper than thefuruncle. It often forms from multiple furuncles. (credit a: modification of work by “Mahdouch”/Wikimedia Commons;credit b: modification of work by “Drvgaikwad”/Wikimedia Commons)Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is another superficial infection caused by S. aureus that is mostcommonly seen in young children, especially infants. Bacterial exotoxins first produce erythema (redness of the skin)and then severe peeling of the skin, as might occur after scalding (Figure 21.11). SSSS is diagnosed by examiningcharacteristics of the skin (which may rub off easily), using blood tests to check for elevated white blood cell counts,culturing, and other methods. Intravenous antibiotics and fluid therapy are used as treatment.924 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 21.11 A newborn with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS), which results in large regions ofpeeling, dead skin. (credit: modification of work by D Jeyakumari, R Gopal, M Eswaran, and C MaheshKumar)ImpetigoThe skin infection impetigo causes the formation of vesicles, pustules, and possibly bullae, often around the noseand mouth. Bullae are large, fluid-filled blisters that measure at least 5 mm in diameter. Impetigo can be diagnosedas either nonbullous or bullous. In nonbullous impetigo, vesicles and pustules rupture and become encrusted sores.Typically the crust is yellowish, often with exudate draining from the base of the lesion. In bullous impetigo, thebullae fill and rupture, resulting in larger, draining, encrusted lesions (Figure 21.12).Especially common in children, impetigo is particularly concerning because it is highly contagious. Impetigo can becaused by S. aureus alone, by Streptococcus pyogenes alone, or by coinfection of S. aureus and S. pyogenes. Impetigois often diagnosed through observation of its characteristic appearance, although culture and susceptibility testingmay also be used.Topical or oral antibiotic treatment is typically effective in treating most cases of impetigo. However, cases caused byS. pyogenes can lead to serious sequelae (pathological conditions resulting from infection, disease, injury, therapy, orother trauma) such as acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), which is severe inflammation in the kidneys.Figure 21.12 Impetigo is characterized by vesicles, pustules, or bullae that rupture, producing encrusted sores.(credit: modification of work by FDA)Nosocomial S. epidermidis InfectionsThough not as virulent as S. aureus, the staphylococcus S. epidermidis can cause serious opportunistic infections.Such infections usually occur only in hospital settings. S. epidermidis is usually a harmless resident of the normalChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 925skin microbiota. However, health-care workers can inadvertently transfer S. epidermidis to medical devices that areinserted into the body, such as catheters, prostheses, and indwelling medical devices. Once it has bypassed the skinbarrier, S. epidermidis can cause infections inside the body that can be difficult to treat. Like S. aureus, S. epidermidisis resistant to many antibiotics, and localized infections can become systemic if not treated quickly. To reduce the riskof nosocomial (hospital-acquired) S. epidermidis, health-care workers must follow strict procedures for handling andsterilizing medical devices before and during surgical procedures.• Why are Staphylococcus aureus infections often purulent?Streptococcal Infections of the SkinStreptococcus are gram-positive cocci with a microscopic morphology that resembles chains of bacteria. Coloniesare typically small (1–2 mm in diameter), translucent, entire edge, with a slightly raised elevation that can be eithernonhemolytic, alpha-hemolytic, or beta-hemolytic when grown on blood agar (Figure 21.13). Additionally, they arefacultative anaerobes that are catalase-negative.Figure 21.13 Streptococcus pyogenes forms chains of cocci. (credit: modification of work by Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention)The genus Streptococcus includes important pathogens that are categorized in serological Lancefield groups based onthe distinguishing characteristics of their surface carbohydrates. The most clinically important streptococcal speciesin humans is S. pyogenes, also known as group A streptococcus (GAS). S. pyogenes produces a variety of extracellularenzymes, including streptolysins O and S, hyaluronidase, and streptokinase. These enzymes can aid in transmissionand contribute to the inflammatory response.[6] S. pyogenes also produces a capsule and M protein, a streptococcalcell wall protein. These virulence factors help the bacteria to avoid phagocytosis while provoking a substantialimmune response that contributes to symptoms associated with streptococcal infections.S. pyogenes causes a wide variety of diseases not only in the skin, but in other organ systems as well. Examples ofdiseases elsewhere in the body include pharyngitis and scarlet fever, which will be covered in later chapters.6. Starr, C.R. and Engelberg N.C. “Role of Hyaluronidase in Subcutaneous Spread and Growth of Group A Streptococcus.” Infection andImmunity 2006(7:1): 40–48. doi: 10.1128/IAI.74.1.40-48.2006.926 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Cellulitis, Erysipelas, and Erythema NosodumCommon streptococcal conditions of the skin include cellulitis, erysipelas, and erythema nodosum. An infection thatdevelops in the dermis or hypodermis can cause cellulitis, which presents as a reddened area of the skin that is warmto the touch and painful. The causative agent is often S. pyogenes, which may breach the epidermis through a cut orabrasion, although cellulitis may also be caused by staphylococci. S. pyogenes can also cause erysipelas, a conditionthat presents as a large, intensely inflamed patch of skin involving the dermis (often on the legs or face). Theseinfections can be suppurative, which results in a bullous form of erysipelas. Streptococcal and other pathogens mayalso cause a condition called erythema nodosum, characterized by inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cells of thehypodermis. It sometimes results from a streptococcal infection, though other pathogens can also cause the condition.It is not suppurative, but leads to red nodules on the skin, most frequently on the shins (Figure 21.14).In general, streptococcal infections are best treated through identification of the specific pathogen followed bytreatment based upon that particular pathogen’s susceptibility to different antibiotics. Many immunological tests,including agglutination reactions and ELISAs, can be used to detect streptococci. Penicillin is commonly prescribedfor treatment of cellulitis and erysipelas because resistance is not widespread in streptococci at this time. In mostpatients, erythema nodosum is self-limiting and is not treated with antimicrobial drugs. Recommended treatmentsmay include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), cool wet compresses, elevation, and bed rest.Figure 21.14 S. pyogenes can cause a variety of skin conditions once it breaches the skin barrier through a cut orwound. (a) Cellulitis presents as a painful, red rash. (b) Erysipelas presents as a raised rash, usually with clearborders. (c) Erythema nodosum is characterized by red lumps or nodules, typically on the lower legs. (credit a:modification of work by “Bassukas ID, Gaitanis G, Zioga A, Boboyianni C, Stergiopoulou C; credit b: modification ofwork by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Dean C, Crow WT)Necrotizing FasciitisStreptococcal infections that start in the skin can sometimes spread elsewhere, resulting in a rare but potentiallylife-threatening condition called necrotizing fasciitis, sometimes referred to as flesh-eating bacterial syndrome. S.pyogenes is one of several species that can cause this rare but potentially-fatal condition; others include Klebsiella,Clostridium, Escherichia coli, S. aureus, and Aeromonas hydrophila.Necrotizing fasciitis occurs when the fascia, a thin layer of connective tissue between the skin and muscle, becomesinfected. Severe invasive necrotizing fasciitis due to Streptococcus pyogenes occurs when virulence factors that areresponsible for adhesion and invasion overcome host defenses. S. pyogenes invasins allow bacterial cells to adhereto tissues and establish infection. Bacterial proteases unique to S. pyogenes aggressively infiltrate and destroy hosttissues, inactivate complement, and prevent neutrophil migration to the site of infection. The infection and resultingtissue death can spread very rapidly, as large areas of skin become detached and die. Treatment generally requiresdebridement (surgical removal of dead or infected tissue) or amputation of infected limbs to stop the spread of theinfection; surgical treatment is supplemented with intravenous antibiotics and other therapies (Figure 21.15).Necrotizing fasciitis does not always originate from a skin infection; in some cases there is no known portal of entry.Some studies have suggested that experiencing a blunt force trauma can increase the risk of developing streptococcalnecrotizing fasciitis.[7]Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 927Figure 21.15 (a) The left leg of this patient shows the clinical features of necrotizing fasciitis. (b) The same patient’sleg is surgically debrided to remove the infection. (credit a, b: modification of work by Piotr Smuszkiewicz, IwonaTrojanowska, and Hanna Tomczak)• How do staphylococcal infections differ in general presentation from streptococcal infections?Part 2Observing that Sam’s wound is purulent, the doctor tells him that he probably has a bacterial infection. Shetakes a sample from the lesion to send for laboratory analysis, but because it is Friday, she does not expectto receive the results until the following Monday. In the meantime, she prescribes an over-the-counter topicalantibiotic ointment. She tells Sam to keep the wound clean and apply a new bandage with the ointment at leasttwice per day.• How would the lab technician determine if the infection is staphylococcal or streptococcal? Suggestseveral specific methods.• What tests might the lab perform to determine the best course of antibiotic treatment?Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.Pseudomonas Infections of the SkinAnother important skin pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a gram-negative, oxidase-positive, aerobic bacillusthat is commonly found in water and soil as well as on human skin. P. aeruginosa is a common cause of opportunisticinfections of wounds and burns. It can also cause hot tub rash, a condition characterized by folliculitis that frequentlyafflicts users of pools and hot tubs (recall the Clinical Focus case in Microbial Biochemistry). P. aeruginosa is alsothe cause of otitis externa (swimmer’s ear), an infection of the ear canal that causes itching, redness, and discomfort,and can progress to fever, pain, and swelling (Figure 21.16).Clinical Focus7. Nuwayhid, Z.B., Aronoff, D.M., and Mulla, Z.D.. “Blunt Trauma as a Risk Factor for Group A Streptococcal Necrotizing Fasciitis.”Annals of Epidemiology (2007) 17:878–881.928 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 21.16 (a) Hot tub folliculitis presents as an itchy red rash. It is typically caused by P. aeruginosa, a bacteriumthat thrives in wet, warm environments such as hot tubs. (b) Otitis externa (swimmer’s ear) may also be caused by P.aeruginosa or other bacteria commonly found in water. Inflammation of the outer ear and ear canal can lead to painfulswelling. (credit b: modification of work by Klaus D. Peter)Wounds infected with P. aeruginosa have a distinctive odor resembling grape soda or fresh corn tortillas. Thisodor is caused by the 2-aminoacetophenone that is used by P. aeruginosa in quorum sensing and contributesto its pathogenicity. Wounds infected with certain strains of P. aeruginosa also produce a blue-green pus dueto the pigments pyocyanin and pyoverdin, which also contribute to its virulence. Pyocyanin and pyoverdin aresiderophores that help P. aeruginosa survive in low-iron environments by enhancing iron uptake. P. aeruginosa alsoproduces several other virulence factors, including phospholipase C (a hemolysin capable of breaking down red bloodcells), exoenzyme S (involved in adherence to epithelial cells), and exotoxin A (capable of causing tissue necrosis).Other virulence factors include a slime that allows the bacterium to avoid being phagocytized, fimbriae for adherence,and proteases that cause tissue damage. P. aeruginosa can be detected through the use of cetrimide agar, which isselective for Pseudomonas species (Figure 21.17).Figure 21.17 (a) These P. aeruginosa colonies are growing on xylose lysine sodium deoxycholate (XLD) agar. (b)Pseudomonas spp. can produce a variety of blue-green pigments. (c) Pseudomonas spp. may produce fluorescein,which fluoresces green under ultraviolet light under the right conditions. (credit a: modification of work by Centers forDisease Control and Prevention)Pseudomonas spp. tend to be resistant to most antibiotics. They often produce β-lactamases, may have mutationsaffecting porins (small cell wall channels) that affect antibiotic uptake, and may pump some antibiotics out of the cell,contributing to this resistance. Polymyxin B and gentamicin are effective, as are some fluoroquinolones. Otitis externais typically treated with ear drops containing acetic acid, antibacterials, and/or steroids to reduce inflammation;ear drops may also include antifungals because fungi can sometimes cause or contribute to otitis externa. Woundinfections caused by Pseudomonas spp. may be treated with topical antibiofilm agents that disrupt the formation ofChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 929biofilms.• Name at least two types of skin infections commonly caused by Pseudomonas spp.AcneOne of the most ubiquitous skin conditions is acne. Acne afflicts nearly 80% of teenagers and young adults, but it canbe found in individuals of all ages. Higher incidence among adolescents is due to hormonal changes that can result inoverproduction of sebum.Acne occurs when hair follicles become clogged by shed skin cells and sebum, causing non-inflammatory lesionscalled comedones. Comedones (singular “comedo”) can take the form of whitehead and blackhead pimples.Whiteheads are covered by skin, whereas blackhead pimples are not; the black color occurs when lipids in the cloggedfollicle become exposed to the air and oxidize (Figure 21.18).Figure 21.18 (a) Acne is characterized by whitehead and blackhead comedones that result from clogged hairfollicles. (b) Blackheads, visible as black spots on the skin, have a dark appearance due to the oxidation of lipids insebum via exposure to the air. (credit a: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)Often comedones lead to infection by Propionibacterium acnes, a gram-positive, non-spore-forming, aerotolerantanaerobic bacillus found on skin that consumes components of sebum. P. acnes secretes enzymes that damage thehair follicle, causing inflammatory lesions that may include papules, pustules, nodules, or pseudocysts, depending ontheir size and severity.Treatment of acne depends on the severity of the case. There are multiple ways to grade acne severity, but threelevels are usually considered based on the number of comedones, the number of inflammatory lesions, and the typesof lesions. Mild acne is treated with topical agents that may include salicylic acid (which helps to remove old skincells) or retinoids (which have multiple mechanisms, including the reduction of inflammation). Moderate acne maybe treated with antibiotics (erythromycin, clindamycin), acne creams (e.g., benzoyl peroxide), and hormones. Severeacne may require treatment using strong medications such as isotretinoin (a retinoid that reduces oil buildup, amongother effects, but that also has serious side effects such as photosensitivity). Other treatments, such as phototherapyand laser therapy to kill bacteria and possibly reduce oil production, are also sometimes used.930 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5• What is the role of Propionibacterium acnes in causing acne?ResolutionSam uses the topical antibiotic over the weekend to treat his wound, but he does not see any improvement.On Monday, the doctor calls to inform him that the results from his laboratory tests are in. The tests showevidence of both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus in his wound. The bacterial species were confirmed usingseveral tests. A passive agglutination test confirmed the presence of S. aureus. In this type of test, latex beadswith antibodies cause agglutination when S. aureus is present. Streptococcus pyogenes was confirmed inthe wound based on bacitracin (0.04 units) susceptibility as well as latex agglutination tests specific for S.pyogenes.Because many strains of S. aureus are resistant to antibiotics, the doctor had also requested an antimicrobialsusceptibility test (AST) at the same time the specimen was submitted for identification. The results of theAST indicated no drug resistance for the Streptococcus spp.; the Staphylococcus spp. showed resistance toseveral common antibiotics, but were susceptible to cefoxitin and oxacillin. Once Sam began to use these newantibiotics, the infection resolved within a week and the lesion healed.Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.AnthraxThe zoonotic disease anthrax is caused by Bacillus anthracis, a gram-positive, endospore-forming, facultativeanaerobe. Anthrax mainly affects animals such as sheep, goats, cattle, and deer, but can be found in humans aswell. Sometimes called wool sorter’s disease, it is often transmitted to humans through contact with infected animalsor animal products, such as wool or hides. However, exposure to B. anthracis can occur by other means, as theendospores are widespread in soils and can survive for long periods of time, sometimes for hundreds of years.The vast majority of anthrax cases (95–99%) occur when anthrax endospores enter the body through abrasions of theskin.[8] This form of the disease is called cutaneous anthrax. It is characterized by the formation of a nodule on theskin; the cells within the nodule die, forming a black eschar, a mass of dead skin tissue (Figure 21.19). The localizedinfection can eventually lead to bacteremia and septicemia. If untreated, cutaneous anthrax can cause death in 20%of patients.[9] Once in the skin tissues, B. anthracis endospores germinate and produce a capsule, which prevents thebacteria from being phagocytized, and two binary exotoxins that cause edema and tissue damage. The first of the twoexotoxins consists of a combination of protective antigen (PA) and an enzymatic lethal factor (LF), forming lethaltoxin (LeTX). The second consists of protective antigen (PA) and an edema factor (EF), forming edema toxin (EdTX).Clinical Focus8. Shadomy, S.V., Traxler, R.M., and Marston, C.K. “Infectious Diseases Related to Travel: Anthrax” 2015. Centers for Disease Control andPrevention. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/infectious-diseases-related-to-travel/anthrax. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.9. US FDA. “Anthrax.” 2015. http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ucm061751.htm. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 931Figure 21.19 (a) Cutaneous anthrax is an infection of the skin by B. anthracis, which produces tissue-damagingexotoxins. Dead tissues accumulating in this nodule have produced a small black eschar. (b) Colonies of B. anthracisgrown on sheep’s blood agar. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Less commonly, anthrax infections can be initiated through other portals of entry such as the digestive tract(gastrointestinal anthrax) or respiratory tract (pulmonary anthrax or inhalation anthrax). Typically, cases ofnoncutaneous anthrax are more difficult to treat than the cutaneous form. The mortality rate for gastrointestinalanthrax can be up to 40%, even with treatment. Inhalation anthrax, which occurs when anthrax spores are inhaled,initially causes influenza-like symptoms, but mortality rates are approximately 45% in treated individuals and 85% inthose not treated. A relatively new form of the disease, injection anthrax, has been reported in Europe in intravenousdrug users; it occurs when drugs are contaminated with B. anthracis. Patients with injection anthrax show signs andsymptoms of severe soft tissue infection that differ clinically from cutaneous anthrax. This often delays diagnosis andtreatment, and leads to a high mortality rate.[10]B. anthracis colonies on blood agar have a rough texture and serrated edges that eventually form an undulating band(Figure 21.19). Broad spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin, erythromycin, and tetracycline are often effectivetreatments.Unfortunately, B. anthracis has been used as a biological weapon and remains on the United Nations’ list of potentialagents of bioterrorism.[11] Over a period of several months in 2001, a number of letters were mailed to members ofthe news media and the United States Congress. As a result, 11 individuals developed cutaneous anthrax and another11 developed inhalation anthrax. Those infected included recipients of the letters, postal workers, and two otherindividuals. Five of those infected with pulmonary anthrax died. The anthrax spores had been carefully prepared toaerosolize, showing that the perpetrator had a high level of expertise in microbiology.[12]A vaccine is available to protect individuals from anthrax. However, unlike most routine vaccines, the current anthraxvaccine is unique in both its formulation and the protocols dictating who receives it.[13] The vaccine is administeredthrough five intramuscular injections over a period of 18 months, followed by annual boosters. The US Food andDrug Administration (FDA) has only approved administration of the vaccine prior to exposure for at-risk adults, suchas individuals who work with anthrax in a laboratory, some individuals who handle animals or animal products (e.g.,some veterinarians), and some members of the United States military. The vaccine protects against cutaneous and10. Berger, T., Kassirer, M., and Aran, A.A.. “Injectional Anthrax—New Presentation of an Old Disease.” Euro Surveillance 19 (2014) 32.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25139073. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.11. United Nations Office at Geneva. “What Are Biological and Toxin Weapons?” http://www.unog.ch/80256EE600585943/%28httpPages%29/29B727532FECBE96C12571860035A6DB?. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.12. Federal Bureau of Investigation. “Famous Cases and Criminals: Amerithrax or Anthrax Investigation.” https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/amerithrax-or-anthrax-investigation. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Anthrax: Medical Care: Prevention: Antibiotics.” http://www.cdc.gov/anthrax/medicalcare/prevention.html. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.932 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5inhalation anthrax using cell-free filtrates of microaerophilic cultures of an avirulent, nonencapsulated strain of B.anthracis.[14] The FDA has not approved the vaccine for routine use after exposure to anthrax, but if there were everan anthrax emergency in the United States, patients could be given anthrax vaccine after exposure to help preventdisease.• What is the characteristic feature of a cutaneous anthrax infection?Bacterial Infections of the SkinBacterial infections of the skin can cause a wide range of symptoms and syndromes, ranging from thesuperficial and relatively harmless to the severe and even fatal. Most bacterial skin infections can be diagnosedby culturing the bacteria and treated with antibiotics. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is also often necessarybecause many strains of bacteria have developed antibiotic resistance. Figure 21.20 summarizes thecharacteristics of some common bacterial skin infections.Disease Profile14. Emergent Biosolutions. AVA (BioThrax) vaccine package insert (Draft). Nov 2015. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/biologicsbloodvaccines/bloodbloodproducts/approvedproducts/licensedproductsblas/ucm074923.pdf.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 933Figure 21.20Bacterial ConjunctivitisLike the skin, the surface of the eye comes in contact with the outside world and is somewhat prone to infection bybacteria in the environment. Bacterial conjunctivitis (pinkeye) is a condition characterized by inflammation of theconjunctiva, often accompanied by a discharge of sticky fluid (described as acute purulent conjunctivitis) (Figure21.21). Conjunctivitis can affect one eye or both, and it usually does not affect vision permanently. Bacterialconjunctivitis is most commonly caused by Haemophilus influenzae, but can also be caused by other species such asMoraxella catarrhalis, S. pneumoniae, and S. aureus. The causative agent may be identified using bacterial cultures,Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen. Bacterialconjunctivitis is very contagious, being transmitted via secretions from infected individuals, but it is also self-limiting.934 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Bacterial conjunctivitis usually resolves in a few days, but topical antibiotics are sometimes prescribed. Because thiscondition is so contagious, medical attention is recommended whenever it is suspected. Individuals who use contactlenses should discontinue their use when conjunctivitis is suspected. Certain symptoms, such as blurred vision, eyepain, and light sensitivity, can be associated with serious conditions and require medical attention.Figure 21.21 Acute, purulent, bacterial conjunctivitis causes swelling and redness in the conjunctiva, the membranelining the whites of the eyes and the inner eyelids. It is often accompanied by a yellow, green, or white discharge,which can dry and become encrusted on the eyelashes. (credit: “Tanalai”/Wikimedia Commons)Neonatal ConjunctivitisNewborns whose mothers have certain sexually transmitted infections are at risk of contracting ophthalmianeonatorum or inclusion conjunctivitis, which are two forms of neonatal conjunctivitis contracted through exposureto pathogens during passage through the birth canal. Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum is caused by Neisseriagonorrhoeae, the bacterium that causes the STD gonorrhea (Figure 21.22). Inclusion (chlamydial) conjunctivitis iscaused by Chlamydia trachomatis, the anaerobic, obligate, intracellular parasite that causes the STD chlamydia.To prevent gonoccocal ophthalmia neonatorum, silver nitrate ointments were once routinely applied to all infants’eyes shortly after birth; however, it is now more common to apply antibacterial creams or drops, such aserythromycin. Most hospitals are required by law to provide this preventative treatment to all infants, becauseconjunctivitis caused by N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, or other bacteria acquired during a vaginal delivery canhave serious complications. If untreated, the infection can spread to the cornea, resulting in ulceration or perforationthat can cause vision loss or even permanent blindness. As such, neonatal conjunctivitis is treated aggressively withoral or intravenous antibiotics to stop the spread of the infection. Causative agents of inclusion conjunctivitis may beidentified using bacterial cultures, Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests.Figure 21.22 A newborn suffering from gonoccocal opthalmia neonatorum. Left untreated, purulent discharge canscar the cornea, causing loss of vision or permanent blindness. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Compare and contrast bacterial conjunctivitis with neonatal conjunctivitis.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 935TrachomaTrachoma, or granular conjunctivitis, is a common cause of preventable blindness that is rare in the United Statesbut widespread in developing countries, especially in Africa and Asia. The condition is caused by the same speciesthat causes neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis in infants, Chlamydia trachomatis. C. trachomatis can be transmittedeasily through fomites such as contaminated towels, bed linens, and clothing and also by direct contact with infectedindividuals. C. trachomatis can also be spread by flies that transfer infected mucous containing C. trachomatis fromone human to another.Infection by C. trachomatis causes chronic conjunctivitis, which leads to the formation of necrotic follicles andscarring in the upper eyelid. The scars turn the eyelashes inward (a condition known as trichiasis) and mechanicalabrasion of the cornea leads to blindness (Figure 21.23). Antibiotics such as azithromycin are effective in treatingtrachoma, and outcomes are good when the disease is treated promptly. In areas where this disease is common, largepublic health efforts are focused on reducing transmission by teaching people how to avoid the risks of the infection.Figure 21.23 (a) If trachoma is not treated early with antibiotics, scarring on the eyelid can lead to trichiasis, acondition in which the eyelashes turn inward. (b) Trichiasis leads to blindness if not corrected by surgery, as shownhere. (credit b: modification of work by Otis Historical Archives National Museum of Health & Medicine)• Why is trachoma rare in the United States?SAFE Eradication of TrachomaThough uncommon in the United States and other developed nations, trachoma is the leading cause ofpreventable blindness worldwide, with more than 4 million people at immediate risk of blindness from trichiasis.The vast majority of those affected by trachoma live in Africa and the Middle East in isolated rural or desertcommunities with limited access to clean water and sanitation. These conditions provide an environmentMicro Connections936 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5conducive to the growth and spread of Chlamydia trachomatis, the bacterium that causes trachoma, viawastewater and eye-seeking flies.In response to this crisis, recent years have seen major public health efforts aimed at treating and preventingtrachoma. The Alliance for Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020 (GET 2020), coordinated by the WorldHealth Organization (WHO), promotes an initiative dubbed “SAFE,” which stands for “Surgery, Antibiotics,Facial cleanliness, and Environmental improvement.” The Carter Center, a charitable, nongovernmentorganization led by former US President Jimmy Carter, has partnered with the WHO to promote the SAFEinitiative in six of the most critically impacted nations in Africa. Through its Trachoma Control Program, theCarter Center trains and equips local surgeons to correct trichiasis and distributes antibiotics to treat trachoma.The program also promotes better personal hygiene through health education and improves sanitation byfunding the construction of household latrines. This reduces the prevalence of open sewage, which providesbreeding grounds for the flies that spread trachoma.Bacterial KeratitisKeratitis can have many causes, but bacterial keratitis is most frequently caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and/or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Contact lens users are particularly at risk for such an infection because S. epidermidisand P. aeruginosa both adhere well to the surface of the lenses. Risk of infection can be greatly reduced by propercare of contact lenses and avoiding wearing lenses overnight. Because the infection can quickly lead to blindness,prompt and aggressive treatment with antibiotics is important. The causative agent may be identified using bacterialcultures, Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen.• Why are contact lens wearers at greater risk for developing keratitis?Biofilms and Infections of the Skin and EyesWhen treating bacterial infections of the skin and eyes, it is important to consider that few such infections can beattributed to a single pathogen. While biofilms may develop in other parts of the body, they are especially relevantto skin infections (such as those caused by S. aureus or P. aeruginosa) because of their prevalence in chronicskin wounds. Biofilms develop when bacteria (and sometimes fungi) attach to a surface and produce extracellularpolymeric substances (EPS) in which cells of multiple organisms may be embedded. When a biofilm develops on awound, it may interfere with the natural healing process as well as diagnosis and treatment.Because biofilms vary in composition and are difficult to replicate in the lab, they are still not thoroughly understood.The extracellular matrix of a biofilm consists of polymers such as polysaccharides, extracellular DNA, proteins,and lipids, but the exact makeup varies. The organisms living within the extracellular matrix may include familiarpathogens as well as other bacteria that do not grow well in cultures (such as numerous obligate anaerobes). Thispresents challenges when culturing samples from infections that involve a biofilm. Because only some species growin vitro, the culture may contain only a subset of the bacterial species involved in the infection.Biofilms confer many advantages to the resident bacteria. For example, biofilms can facilitate attachment to surfaceson or in the host organism (such as wounds), inhibit phagocytosis, prevent the invasion of neutrophils, and sequesterhost antibodies. Additionally, biofilms can provide a level of antibiotic resistance not found in the isolated cells andcolonies that are typical of laboratory cultures. The extracellular matrix provides a physical barrier to antibiotics,shielding the target cells from exposure. Moreover, cells within a biofilm may differentiate to create subpopulationsof dormant cells called persister cells. Nutrient limitations deep within a biofilm add another level of resistance, asstress responses can slow metabolism and increase drug resistance.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 937Bacterial Infections of the EyesA number of bacteria are able to cause infection when introduced to the mucosa of the eye. In general,bacterial eye infections can lead to inflammation, irritation, and discharge, but they vary in severity. Some aretypically short-lived, and others can become chronic and lead to permanent eye damage. Prevention requireslimiting exposure to contagious pathogens. When infections do occur, prompt treatment with antibiotics canoften limit or prevent permanent damage. Figure 21.24 summarizes the characteristics of some commonbacterial infections of the eyes.Figure 21.2421.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and EyesLearning Objectives• Identify the most common viruses associated with infections of the skin and eyes• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the skin and eyesUntil recently, it was thought that the normal microbiota of the body consisted primarily of bacteria and some fungi.However, in addition to bacteria, the skin is colonized by viruses, and recent studies suggest that Papillomaviridae,Polyomaviridae and Circoviridae also contribute to the normal skin microbiota. However, some viruses associatedwith skin are pathogenic, and these viruses can cause diseases with a wide variety of presentations.Numerous types of viral infections cause rashes or lesions on the skin; however, in many cases these skin conditionsresult from infections that originate in other body systems. In this chapter, we will limit the discussion to viral skinDisease Profile938 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5infections that use the skin as a portal of entry. Later chapters will discuss viral infections such as chickenpox,measles, and rubella—diseases that cause skin rashes but invade the body through portals of entry other than the skin.PapillomasPapillomas (warts) are the expression of common skin infections by human papillomavirus (HPV) and aretransmitted by direct contact. There are many types of HPV, and they lead to a variety of different presentations, suchas common warts, plantar warts, flat warts, and filiform warts. HPV can also cause sexually-transmitted genital warts,which will be discussed in Urogenital System Infections. Vaccination is available for some strains of HPV.Common warts tend to develop on fingers, the backs of hands, and around nails in areas with broken skin. In contrast,plantar warts (also called foot warts) develop on the sole of the foot and can grow inwards, causing pain and pressureduring walking. Flat warts can develop anywhere on the body, are often numerous, and are relatively smooth andsmall compared with other wart types. Filiform warts are long, threadlike warts that grow quickly.In some cases, the immune system may be strong enough to prevent warts from forming or to eradicate establishedwarts. However, treatment of established warts is typically required. There are many available treatments for warts,and their effectiveness varies. Common warts can be frozen off with liquid nitrogen. Topical applications of salicylicacid may also be effective. Other options are electrosurgery (burning), curettage (cutting), excision, painting withcantharidin (which causes the wart to die so it can more easily be removed), laser treatments, treatment withbleomycin, chemical peels, and immunotherapy (Figure 21.25).Figure 21.25 Warts can vary in shape and in location. (a) Multiple plantar warts have grown on this toe. (b) A filiformwart has grown on this eyelid.Oral HerpesAnother common skin virus is herpes simplex virus (HSV). HSV has historically been divided into two types, HSV-1and HSV-2. HSV-1 is typically transmitted by direct oral contact between individuals, and is usually associated withoral herpes. HSV-2 is usually transmitted sexually and is typically associated with genital herpes. However, bothHSV-1 and HSV-2 are capable of infecting any mucous membrane, and the incidence of genital HSV-1 and oralHSV-2 infections has been increasing in recent years. In this chapter, we will limit our discussion to infections causedby HSV-1; HSV-2 and genital herpes will be discussed in Urogenital System Infections.Infection by HSV-1 commonly manifests as cold sores or fever blisters, usually on or around the lips (Figure21.26). HSV-1 is highly contagious, with some studies suggesting that up to 65% of the US population is infected;however, many infected individuals are asymptomatic.[15] Moreover, the virus can be latent for long periods, residing15. Wald, A., and Corey, L. “Persistence in the Population: Epidemiology, Transmission.” In: A. Arvin, G. Campadelli-Fiume, E. MocarskiChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 939in the trigeminal nerve ganglia between recurring bouts of symptoms. Recurrence can be triggered by stress orenvironmental conditions (systemic or affecting the skin). When lesions are present, they may blister, break open, andcrust. The virus can be spread through direct contact, even when a patient is asymptomatic.While the lips, mouth, and face are the most common sites for HSV-1 infections, lesions can spread to other areasof the body. Wrestlers and other athletes involved in contact sports may develop lesions on the neck, shoulders, andtrunk. This condition is often called herpes gladiatorum. Herpes lesions that develop on the fingers are often calledherpetic whitlow.HSV-1 infections are commonly diagnosed from their appearance, although laboratory testing can confirm thediagnosis. There is no cure, but antiviral medications such as acyclovir, penciclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovirare used to reduce symptoms and risk of transmission. Topical medications, such as creams with n-docosanol andpenciclovir, can also be used to reduce symptoms such as itching, burning, and tingling.Figure 21.26 This cold sore was caused by HSV-1. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• What are the most common sites for the appearance of herpetic lesions?Roseola and Fifth DiseaseThe viral diseases roseola and fifth disease are somewhat similar in terms of their presentation, but they are causedby different viruses. Roseola, sometimes called roseola infantum or exanthem subitum (“sudden rash”), is a mild viralinfection usually caused by human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) and occasionally by HHV-7. It is spread via direct contactwith the saliva or respiratory secretions of an infected individual, often through droplet aerosols. Roseola is verycommon in children, with symptoms including a runny nose, a sore throat, and a cough, along with (or followed by)a high fever (39.4 ºC). About three to five days after the fever subsides, a rash may begin to appear on the chest andabdomen. The rash, which does not cause discomfort, initially forms characteristic macules that are flat or papules thatare firm and slightly raised; some macules or papules may be surrounded by a white ring. The rash may eventuallyspread to the neck and arms, and sometimes continues to spread to the face and legs. The diagnosis is generally madebased upon observation of the symptoms. However, it is possible to perform serological tests to confirm the diagnosis.While treatment may be recommended to control the fever, the disease usually resolves without treatment within aweek after the fever develops. For individuals at particular risk, such as those who are immunocompromised, theantiviral medication ganciclovir may be used.Fifth disease (also known as erythema infectiosum) is another common, highly contagious illness that causes adistinct rash that is critical to diagnosis. Fifth disease is caused by parvovirus B19, and is transmitted by contactet al. Human Herpesviruses: Biology, Therapy, and Immunoprophylaxis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK47447/. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.940 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5with respiratory secretions from an infected individual. Infection is more common in children than adults. Whileapproximately 20% of individuals will be asymptomatic during infection,[16] others will exhibit cold-like symptoms(headache, fever, and upset stomach) during the early stages when the illness is most infectious. Several days later, adistinct red facial rash appears, often called “slapped cheek” rash (Figure 21.27). Within a few days, a second rashmay appear on the arms, legs, chest, back, or buttocks. The rash may come and go for several weeks, but usuallydisappears within seven to twenty-one days, gradually becoming lacy in appearance as it recedes.In children, the disease usually resolves on its own without medical treatment beyond symptom relief as needed.Adults may experience different and possibly more serious symptoms. Many adults with fifth disease do not developany rash, but may experience joint pain and swelling that lasts several weeks or months. Immunocompromisedindividuals can develop severe anemia and may need blood transfusions or immune globulin injections. While therash is the most important component of diagnosis (especially in children), the symptoms of fifth disease are notalways consistent. Serological testing can be conducted for confirmation.Figure 21.27 (a) Roseola, a mild viral infection common in young children, generally begins with symptoms similarto a cold, followed by a pink, patchy rash that starts on the trunk and spreads outward. (b) Fifth disease exhibitssimilar symptoms in children, except for the distinctive “slapped cheek” rash that originates on the face.• Identify at least one similarity and one difference between roseola and fifth disease.Viral ConjunctivitisLike bacterial conjunctivitis viral infections of the eye can cause inflammation of the conjunctiva and discharge fromthe eye. However, viral conjunctivitis tends to produce a discharge that is more watery than the thick dischargeassociated with bacterial conjunctivitis. The infection is contagious and can easily spread from one eye to the other orto other individuals through contact with eye discharge.Viral conjunctivitis is commonly associated with colds caused by adenoviruses; however, other viruses can also cause16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fifth Disease.” http://www.cdc.gov/parvovirusb19/fifth-disease.html. Accessed Sept 14,2016.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 941conjunctivitis. If the causative agent is uncertain, eye discharge can be tested to aid in diagnosis. Antibiotic treatmentof viral conjunctivitis is ineffective, and symptoms usually resolve without treatment within a week or two.Herpes KeratitisHerpes infections caused by HSV-1 can sometimes spread to the eye from other areas of the body, which may resultin keratoconjunctivitis. This condition, generally called herpes keratitis or herpetic keratitis, affects the conjunctivaand cornea, causing irritation, excess tears, and sensitivity to light. Deep lesions in the cornea may eventually form,leading to blindness. Because keratitis can have numerous causes, laboratory testing is necessary to confirm thediagnosis when HSV-1 is suspected; once confirmed, antiviral medications may be prescribed.Viral Infections of the Skin and EyesA number of viruses can cause infections via direct contact with skin and eyes, causing signs and symptomsranging from rashes and lesions to warts and conjunctivitis. All of these viral diseases are contagious, andwhile some are more common in children (fifth disease and roseola), others are prevalent in people of all ages(oral herpes, viral conjunctivitis, papillomas). In general, the best means of prevention is avoiding contact withinfected individuals. Treatment may require antiviral medications; however, several of these conditions are mildand typically resolve without treatment. Figure 21.28 summarizes the characteristics of some common viralinfections of the skin and eyes.Disease Profile942 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 21.2821.4 Mycoses of the SkinLearning Objectives• Identify the most common fungal pathogens associated with cutaneous and subcutaneous mycoses• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the skinMany fungal infections of the skin involve fungi that are found in the normal skin microbiota. Some of thesefungi can cause infection when they gain entry through a wound; others mainly cause opportunistic infections inimmunocompromised patients. Other fungal pathogens primarily cause infection in unusually moist environmentsthat promote fungal growth; for example, sweaty shoes, communal showers, and locker rooms provide excellentbreeding grounds that promote the growth and transmission of fungal pathogens.Fungal infections, also called mycoses, can be divided into classes based on their invasiveness. Mycoses that causesuperficial infections of the epidermis, hair, and nails, are called cutaneous mycoses. Mycoses that penetrate theepidermis and the dermis to infect deeper tissues are called subcutaneous mycoses. Mycoses that spread throughoutthe body are called systemic mycoses.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 943TineasA group of cutaneous mycoses called tineas are caused by dermatophytes, fungal molds that require keratin,a protein found in skin, hair, and nails, for growth. There are three genera of dermatophytes, all of which cancause cutaneous mycoses: Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Tineas on most areas of the body aregenerally called ringworm, but tineas in specific locations may have distinctive names and symptoms (see Table21.3 and Figure 21.29). Keep in mind that these names—even though they are Latinized—refer to locations on thebody, not causative organisms. Tineas can be caused by different dermatophytes in most areas of the body.Some Common Tineas and Location on the BodyTinea corporis (ringworm) BodyTinea capitis (ringworm) ScalpTinea pedis (athlete’s foot) FeetTinea barbae (barber’s itch) BeardTinea cruris (jock itch) GroinTinea unguium (onychomycosis) Toenails, fingernailsTable 21.3Figure 21.29 Tineas are superficial cutaneous mycoses and are common. (a) Tinea barbae (barber’s itch) occurs onthe lower face. (b) Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) occurs on the feet, causing itching, burning, and dry, cracked skinbetween the toes. (c) A close-up view of tinea corporis (ringworm) caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes. (credit a,c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Al Hasan M,Fitzgerald SM, Saoudian M, Krishnaswamy G)Dermatophytes are commonly found in the environment and in soils and are frequently transferred to the skin viacontact with other humans and animals. Fungal spores can also spread on hair. Many dermatophytes grow well inmoist, dark environments. For example, tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) commonly spreads in public showers, and thecausative fungi grow well in the dark, moist confines of sweaty shoes and socks. Likewise, tinea cruris (jock itch)often spreads in communal living environments and thrives in warm, moist undergarments.Tineas on the body (tinea corporis) often produce lesions that grow radially and heal towards the center. This causesthe formation of a red ring, leading to the misleading name of ringworm recall the Clinical Focus case in TheEukaryotes of Microbiology.Several approaches may be used to diagnose tineas. A Wood’s lamp (also called a black lamp) with a wavelengthof 365 nm is often used. When directed on a tinea, the ultraviolet light emitted from the Wood’s lamp causes thefungal elements (spores and hyphae) to fluoresce. Direct microscopic evaluation of specimens from skin scrapings,hair, or nails can also be used to detect fungi. Generally, these specimens are prepared in a wet mount using apotassium hydroxide solution (10%–20% aqueous KOH), which dissolves the keratin in hair, nails, and skin cells to944 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5allow for visualization of the hyphae and fungal spores. The specimens may be grown on Sabouraud dextrose CC(chloramphenicol/cyclohexamide), a selective agar that supports dermatophyte growth while inhibiting the growth ofbacteria and saprophytic fungi (Figure 21.30). Macroscopic colony morphology is often used to initially identify thegenus of the dermatophyte; identification can be further confirmed by visualizing the microscopic morphology usingeither a slide culture or a sticky tape prep stained with lactophenol cotton blue.Various antifungal treatments can be effective against tineas. Allylamine ointments that include terbinafine arecommonly used; miconazole and clotrimazole are also available for topical treatment, and griseofulvin is used orally.Figure 21.30 To diagnose tineas, the dermatophytes may be grown on a Sabouraud dextrose CC agar plate. Thisculture contains a strain of Trichophyton rubrum, one of the most common causes of tineas on various parts of thebody. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)• Why are tineas, caused by fungal molds, often called ringworm?Cutaneous AspergillosisAnother cause of cutaneous mycoses is Aspergillus, a genus consisting of molds of many different species, some ofwhich cause a condition called aspergillosis. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins in theskin, is rare but does occur. More common is secondary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins inthe respiratory system and disseminates systemically. Both primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis result indistinctive eschars that form at the site or sites of infection (Figure 21.31). Pulmonary aspergillosis will be discussedmore thoroughly in Respiratory Mycoses).Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 945Figure 21.31 (a) Eschar on a patient with secondary cutaneous aspergillosis. (b) Micrograph showing aconidiophore of Aspergillus. (credit a: modification of work by Santiago M, Martinez JH, Palermo C, Figueroa C,Torres O, Trinidad R, Gonzalez E, Miranda Mde L, Garcia M, Villamarzo G; credit b: modification of work by U.S.Department of Health and Human Services)Primary cutaneous aspergillosis usually occurs at the site of an injury and is most often caused by Aspergillusfumigatus or Aspergillus flavus. It is usually reported in patients who have had an injury while working in anagricultural or outdoor environment. However, opportunistic infections can also occur in health-care settings, oftenat the site of intravenous catheters, venipuncture wounds, or in association with burns, surgical wounds, or occlusivedressing. After candidiasis, aspergillosis is the second most common hospital-acquired fungal infection and oftenoccurs in immunocompromised patients, who are more vulnerable to opportunistic infections.Cutaneous aspergillosis is diagnosed using patient history, culturing, histopathology using a skin biopsy. Treatmentinvolves the use of antifungal medications such as voriconazole (preferred for invasive aspergillosis), itraconazole,and amphotericin B if itraconazole is not effective. For immunosuppressed individuals or burn patients, medicationmay be used and surgical or immunotherapy treatments may be needed.• Identify the sources of infection for primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis.Candidiasis of the Skin and NailsCandida albicans and other yeasts in the genus Candida can cause skin infections referred to as cutaneous candidiasis.Candida spp. are sometimes responsible for intertrigo, a general term for a rash that occurs in a skin fold, or otherlocalized rashes on the skin. Candida can also infect the nails, causing them to become yellow and harden (Figure21.32).946 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5Figure 21.32 (a) This red, itchy rash is the result of cutaneous candidiasis, an opportunistic infection of the skincaused by the yeast Candida albicans. (b) Fungal infections of the nail (tinea unguium) can be caused bydermatophytes or Candida spp. The nail becomes yellow, brittle, and prone to breaking. This condition is relativelycommon among adults. (c) C. albicans growing on Sabouraud dextrose agar. (credit a: modification of work by U.S.Department of Veterans Affairs; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Candidiasis of the skin and nails is diagnosed through clinical observation and through culture, Gram stain, andKOH wet mounts. Susceptibility testing for anti-fungal agents can also be done. Cutaneous candidiasis can be treatedwith topical or systemic azole antifungal medications. Because candidiasis can become invasive, patients sufferingfrom HIV/AIDS, cancer, or other conditions that compromise the immune system may benefit from preventivetreatment. Azoles, such as clotrimazole, econazole, fluconazole, ketoconazole, and miconazole; nystatin; terbinafine;and naftifine may be used for treatment. Long-term treatment with medications such as itraconazole or ketoconazolemay be used for chronic infections. Repeat infections often occur, but this risk can be reduced by carefully followingtreatment recommendations, avoiding excessive moisture, maintaining good health, practicing good hygiene, andhaving appropriate clothing (including footwear).Candida also causes infections in other parts of the body besides the skin. These include vaginal yeast infections (seeFungal Infections of the Reproductive System) and oral thrush (see Microbial Diseases of the Mouthand Oral Cavity).• What are the signs and symptoms of candidiasis of the skin and nails?SporotrichosisWhereas cutaneous mycoses are superficial, subcutaneous mycoses can spread from the skin to deeper tissues. Intemperate regions, the most common subcutaneous mycosis is a condition called sporotrichosis, caused by thefungus Sporothrix schenkii and commonly known as rose gardener’s disease or rose thorn disease (recall Case inPoint: Every Rose Has Its Thorn). Sporotrichosis is often contracted after working with soil, plants, or timber,as the fungus can gain entry through a small wound such as a thorn-prick or splinter. Sporotrichosis can generallybe avoided by wearing gloves and protective clothing while gardening and promptly cleaning and disinfecting anywounds sustained during outdoor activities.Sporothrix infections initially present as small ulcers in the skin, but the fungus can spread to the lymphatic systemand sometimes beyond. When the infection spreads, nodules appear, become necrotic, and may ulcerate. As morelymph nodes become affected, abscesses and ulceration may develop over a larger area (often on one arm or hand).In severe cases, the infection may spread more widely throughout the body, although this is relatively uncommon.Sporothrix infection can be diagnosed based upon histologic examination of the affected tissue. Its macroscopicChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 947morphology can be observed by culturing the mold on potato dextrose agar, and its microscopic morphology canbe observed by staining a slide culture with lactophenol cotton blue. Treatment with itraconazole is generallyrecommended.• Describe the progression of a Sporothrix schenkii infection.Mycoses of the SkinCutaneous mycoses are typically opportunistic, only able to cause infection when the skin barrier is breachedthrough a wound. Tineas are the exception, as the dermatophytes responsible for tineas are able to grow onskin, hair, and nails, especially in moist conditions. Most mycoses of the skin can be avoided through goodhygiene and proper wound care. Treatment requires antifungal medications. Figure 21.33 summarizes thecharacteristics of some common fungal infections of the skin.Figure 21.3321.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin andDisease Profile948 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5EyesLearning Objectives• Identify two parasites that commonly cause infections of the skin and eyes• Identify the major characteristics of specific parasitic diseases affecting the skin and eyesMany parasitic protozoans and helminths use the skin or eyes as a portal of entry. Some may physically burrow intothe skin or the mucosa of the eye; others breach the skin barrier by means of an insect bite. Still others take advantageof a wound to bypass the skin barrier and enter the body, much like other opportunistic pathogens. Although manyparasites enter the body through the skin, in this chapter we will limit our discussion to those for which the skin oreyes are the primary site of infection. Parasites that enter through the skin but travel to a different site of infection willbe covered in other chapters. In addition, we will limit our discussion to microscopic parasitic infections of the skinand eyes. Macroscopic parasites such as lice, scabies, mites, and ticks are beyond the scope of this text.Acanthamoeba InfectionsAcanthamoeba is a genus of free-living protozoan amoebae that are common in soils and unchlorinated bodies offresh water. (This is one reason why some swimming pools are treated with chlorine.) The genus contains a fewparasitic species, some of which can cause infections of the eyes, skin, and nervous system. Such infections cansometimes travel and affect other body systems. Skin infections may manifest as abscesses, ulcers, and nodules. Whenacanthamoebae infect the eye, causing inflammation of the cornea, the condition is called Acanthamoeba keratitis.Figure 21.34 illustrates the Acanthamoeba life cycle and various modes of infection.While Acanthamoeba keratitis is initially mild, it can lead to severe corneal damage, vision impairment, or evenblindness if left untreated. Similar to eye infections involving P. aeruginosa, Acanthamoeba poses a much greaterrisk to wearers of contact lenses because the amoeba can thrive in the space between contact lenses and the cornea.Prevention through proper contact lens care is important. Lenses should always be properly disinfected prior to use,and should never be worn while swimming or using a hot tub.Acanthamoeba can also enter the body through other pathways, including skin wounds and the respiratory tract.It usually does not cause disease except in immunocompromised individuals; however, in rare cases, the infectioncan spread to the nervous system, resulting in a usually fatal condition called granulomatous amoebic encephalitis(GAE) (see Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System). Disseminated infections, lesions,and Acanthamoeba keratitis can be diagnosed by observing symptoms and examining patient samples under themicroscope to view the parasite. Skin biopsies may be used.Acanthamoeba keratitis is difficult to treat, and prompt treatment is necessary to prevent the condition fromprogressing. The condition generally requires three to four weeks of intensive treatment to resolve. Commontreatments include topical antiseptics (e.g., polyhexamethylene biguanide, chlorhexidine, or both), sometimes withpainkillers or corticosteroids (although the latter are controversial because they suppress the immune system, whichcan worsen the infection). Azoles are sometimes prescribed as well. Advanced cases of keratitis may require a cornealtransplant to prevent blindness.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 949Figure 21.34 Acanthamoeba spp. are waterborne parasites very common in unchlorinated aqueous environments.As shown in this life cycle, Acanthamoeba cysts and trophozoites are both capable of entering the body throughvarious routes, causing infections of the eye, skin, and central nervous system. (credit: modification of work byCenters for Disease Control and Prevention)Figure 21.35 (a) An Acanthamoeba cyst. (b) An Acanthamoeba trophozoite (c) The eye of a patient withAcanthamoeba keratitis. The fluorescent color, which is due to sodium fluorescein application, highlights significantdamage to the cornea and vascularization of the surrounding conjunctiva. (credit a: modification of work by Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention; credit b, c: modification of work by Jacob Lorenzo-Morales, Naveed A Kahn andJulia Walochnik)• How are Acanthamoeba infections acquired?950 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5LoiasisThe helminth Loa loa, also known as the African eye worm, is a nematode that can cause loiasis, a disease endemicto West and Central Africa (Figure 21.36). The disease does not occur outside that region except when carried bytravelers. There is evidence that individual genetic differences affect susceptibility to developing loiasis after infectionby the Loa loa worm. Even in areas in which Loa loa worms are common, the disease is generally found in less than30% of the population.[17] It has been suggested that travelers who spend time in the region may be somewhat moresusceptible to developing symptoms than the native population, and the presentation of infection may differ.[18]The parasite is spread by deerflies (genus Chrysops), which can ingest the larvae from an infected human via a bloodmeal (Figure 21.36). When the deerfly bites other humans, it deposits the larvae into their bloodstreams. After aboutfive months in the human body, some larvae develop into adult worms, which can grow to several centimeters inlength and live for years in the subcutaneous tissue of the host.The name “eye worm” alludes to the visible migration of worms across the conjunctiva of the eye. Adult worms livein the subcutaneous tissues and can travel at about 1 cm per hour. They can often be observed when migrating throughthe eye, and sometimes under the skin; in fact, this is generally how the disease is diagnosed. It is also possible to testfor antibodies, but the presence of antibodies does not necessarily indicate a current infection; it only means that theindividual was exposed at some time. Some patients are asymptomatic, but in others the migrating worms can causefever and areas of allergic inflammation known as Calabar swellings. Worms migrating through the conjunctiva cancause temporary eye pain and itching, but generally there is no lasting damage to the eye. Some patients experience arange of other symptoms, such as widespread itching, hives, and joint and muscle pain.Worms can be surgically removed from the eye or the skin, but this treatment only relieves discomfort; it does notcure the infection, which involves many worms. The preferred treatment is diethylcarbamazine, but this medicationproduces severe side effects in some individuals, such as brain inflammation and possible death in patients withheavy infections. Albendazole is also sometimes used if diethylcarbamazine is not appropriate or not successful. Ifleft untreated for many years, loiasis can damage the kidneys, heart, and lungs, though these symptoms are rare.17. Garcia, A.. et al. “Genetic Epidemiology of Host Predisposition Microfilaraemia in Human Loiasis.” Tropical Medicine andInternational Health 4 (1999) 8:565–74. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10499080. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.18. Spinello, A., et al. “Imported Loa loa Filariasis: Three Cases and a Review of Cases Reported in Non-Endemic Countries in the Past 25Years.” International Journal of Infectious Disease 16 (2012) 9: e649–e662. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2012.05.1023.Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 951Figure 21.36 This Loa loa worm, measuring about 55 mm long, was extracted from the conjunctiva of a patient withloiasis. The Loa loa has a complex life cycle. Biting deerflies native to the rain forests of Central and West Africatransmit the larvae between humans. (credit a: modification of work by Eballe AO, Epée E, Koki G, Owono D, MvogoCE, Bella AL; credit b: modification of work by NIAID; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control952 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5and Prevention)• Describe the most common way to diagnose loiasis.See a video (https://openstax.org/l/22microfilvid) of a live Loa loa microfilariaunder the microscope.Parasitic Skin and Eye InfectionsThe protozoan Acanthamoeba and the helminth Loa loa are two parasites capable of causing infections of theskin and eyes. Figure 21.37 summarizes the characteristics of some common fungal infections of the skin.Figure 21.37Summary21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin and Eyes• Human skin consists of two main layers, the epidermis and dermis, which are situated on top of thehypodermis, a layer of connective tissue.• The skin is an effective physical barrier against microbial invasion.• The skin’s relatively dry environment and normal microbiota discourage colonization by transient microbes.Link to LearningDisease ProfileChapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections 953• The skin’s normal microbiota varies from one region of the body to another.• The conjunctiva of the eye is a frequent site for microbial infection, but deeper eye infections are lesscommon; multiple types of conjunctivitis exist.21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes• Staphylococcus and Streptococcus cause many different types of skin infections, many of which occur whenbacteria breach the skin barrier through a cut or wound.• S. aureus are frequently associated with purulent skin infections that manifest as folliculitis, furuncles, orcarbuncles. S. aureus is also a leading cause of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS).• S. aureus is generally drug resistant and current MRSA strains are resistant to a wide range of antibiotics.• Community-acquired and hospital-acquired staphyloccocal infections are an ongoing problem because manypeople are asymptomatic carriers.• Group A streptococci (GAS), S. pyogenes, is often responsible for cases of cellulitis, erysipelas, anderythema nosodum. GAS are also one of many possible causes of necrotizing fasciitis.• P. aeruginosa is often responsible for infections of the skin and eyes, including wound and burn infections,hot tub rash, otitis externa, and bacterial keratitis.• Acne is a common skin condition that can become more inflammatory when Propionibacterium acnes infectshair follicles and pores clogged with dead skin cells and sebum.• Cutaneous anthrax occurs when Bacillus anthracis breaches the skin barrier. The infection results in alocalized black eschar on skin. Anthrax can be fatal if B. anthracis spreads to the bloodstream.• Common bacterial conjunctivitis is often caused by Haemophilus influenzae and usually resolves on its ownin a few days. More serious forms of conjunctivitis include gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum, inclusionconjunctivitis (chlamydial), and trachoma, all of which can lead to blindness if untreated.• Keratitis is frequently caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and/or Pseudomonas aeruginosa, especiallyamong contact lens users, and can lead to blindness.• Biofilms complicate the treatment of wound and eye infections because pathogens living in biofilms can bedifficult to treat and eliminate.21.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes• Papillomas (warts) are caused by human papillomaviruses.• Herpes simplex virus (especially HSV-1) mainly causes oral herpes, but lesions can appear on other areasof the skin and mucous membranes.• Roseola and fifth disease are common viral illnesses that cause skin rashes; roseola is caused by HHV-6 andHHV-7 while fifth disease is caused by parvovirus 19.• Viral conjunctivitis is often caused by adenoviruses and may be associated with the common cold. Herpeskeratitis is caused by herpesviruses that spread to the eye.21.4 Mycoses of the Skin• Mycoses can be cutaneous, subcutaneous, or systemic.• Common cutaneous mycoses include tineas caused by dermatophytes of the genera Trichophyton,Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Tinea corporis is called ringworm. Tineas on other parts of the bodyhave names associated with the affected body part.• Aspergillosis is a fungal disease caused by molds of the genus Aspergillus. Primary cutaneous aspergillosisenters through a break in the skin, such as the site of an injury or a surgical wound; it is a common hospitalacquiredinfection. In secondary cutaneous aspergillosis, the fungus enters via the respiratory system anddisseminates systemically, manifesting in lesions on the skin.• The most common subcutaneous mycosis is sporotrichosis (rose gardener’s disease), caused by Sporothrixschenkii.• Yeasts of the genus Candida can cause opportunistic infections of the skin called candidiasis, producing954 Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye InfectionsThis OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.5intertrigo, localized rashes, or yellowing of the nails.21.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin and Eyes• The protozoan Acanthamoeba and the helminth Loa loa are two parasites that can breach the skin barrier,causing infections of the skin and eyes.• Acanthamoeba keratitis is a parasitic infection of the eye that often results from improper disinfection ofcontact lenses or swimming while wearing contact lenses.• Loiasis, or eye worm, is a disease endemic to Africa that is caused by parasitic worms that infect thesubcutaneous tissue of the skin and eyes. It is transmitted by deerfly vectors.