Arachnology is the scientific study of spiders and related animals such as scorpions, pseudoscorpions, and harvestmen, collectively called arachnids. Those who study spiders and other arachnids are arachnologists.
The word "arachnology" derives from Greek ἀράχνη, arachnē, "spider"; and -λογία, -logia.


== Arachnology as a science ==
Arachnologists are primarily responsible for classifying arachnids and studying aspects of their biology. In the popular imagination, they are sometimes referred to as spider experts. Disciplines within arachnology include naming species and determining their evolutionary relationships to one another (taxonomy and systematics), studying how they interact with other members of their species and/or their environment (behavioural ecology), or how they are distributed in different regions and habitats (faunistics). Other arachnologists perform research on the anatomy or physiology of arachnids, including the venom of spiders and scorpions. Others study the impact of spiders in agricultural ecosystems and whether they can be used as biological control agents.


=== Subdisciplines ===
Arachnology can be broken down into several specialties. These topics include:

acarology –  the study of ticks and mites
araneology –  the study of spiders
scorpiology – the study of scorpions


== Arachnological societies ==
Arachnologists are served by a number of scientific societies, both national and international in scope. Their main roles are to encourage the exchange of ideas between researchers, to organise meetings and congresses, and in a number of cases, to publish academic journals. Some are also involved in science outreach programs, such as the European spider of the year, which raise awareness of these animals among the general public.
International

International Society of Arachnology (ISA)  websiteAfrica

African Arachnological Society (AFRAS)  websiteAsia 

Arachnological Society of Japan (ASJ) website
Asian Society of Arachnology (ASA) website
Indian Society of Arachnology website
Iranian Arachnological Society (IAS) websiteAustralasia

Australasian Arachnological Society websiteEurope

Aracnofilia – Associazione Italiana di Aracnologia website
Arachnologia Belgica – Belgian Arachnological Society (ARABEL) website
Arachnologische Gesellschaft (AraGes) website
Association Francaise d'Arachnologie (AsFrA) website
British Arachnological Society (BAS) website
Czech Arachnological Society website
European Society of Arachnology (ESA) website
Grupo Ibérico de Aracnologia (Iberian Peninsula) website
Magyar Arachnolgia – Hungarian ArachnologyNorth America

American Arachnological Society (AAS) website


== Popular arachnology ==
In the 1970s, arachnids – particularly tarantulas – started to become popular as exotic pets. Many tarantulas thus become more widely known by their common names such as the Mexican redknee tarantula (Brachypelma smithi).
Various societies now focus on the husbandry, care, study, and captive breeding of tarantulas, and other arachnids. They also typically produce journals or newsletters with articles and advice on these subjects.

British Tarantula Society (BTS) website
Deutsche Arachnologische Gesellschaft (DeArGe) website
The American Tarantula Society (ATS) website


== See also ==
Cultural depictions of spiders
Entomology
Category:Arachnologists


== External information links ==
International Society of Arachnology
Spider Myths: Spiders are Easy to Identify